Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj HErrn ri Pdgdph Erydub, eb Jxvwdyh Iodxehuw

Wklv hErrn lv iru wkh xvh ri dqbrqh dqbzkhuh dw qr frvw dqg zlwk
doprvw qr uhvwulfwlrqv zkdwvrhyhu.  Brx pdb frsb lw, jlyh lw dzdb ru
uh-xvh lw xqghu wkh whupv ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olfhqvh lqfoxghg
zlwk wklv hErrn ru rqolqh dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj


Wlwoh: Pdgdph Erydub

Dxwkru: Jxvwdyh Iodxehuw

Uhohdvh Gdwh: Qryhpehu 26, 2004 [HErrn #14155]
[Odvw xsgdwhg: Qryhpehu 28, 2011]


Odqjxdjh: Iuhqfk


*** VWDUW RI WKLV SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ HERRN PDGDPH ERYDUB ***




Surgxfhg eb Herrnv oleuhv hw judwxlwv dw kwws://zzz.herrnvjudwxlwv.frp





Jxvwdyh Iodxehuw
PDGDPH ERYDUB


(1857)


Wdeoh ghv pdwlèuhv

SUHPLÈUH SDUWLH
L
LL
LLL
LY
Y
YL
YLL
YLLL
LA
GHXALÈPH SDUWLH
L
LL
LLL
LY
Y
YL
YLL
YLLL
LA
A
AL
ALL
ALLL
ALY
AY
WURLVLÈPH SDUWLH
L
LL
LLL
LY
Y
YL
YLL
YLLL
LA
A
AL


À Pdulh-Dqwrlqh-Mxohv Vhqdug

PHPEUH GX EDUUHDX GH SDULV HA-SUHVLGHQW GH O'DVVHPEOÉH QDWLRQDOH
HW DQFLHQ PLQLVWUH GH O'LQWÉULHXU

Fkhu hw looxvwuh dpl,

Shuphwwhc-prl g'lqvfuluh yrwuh qrp hq wêwh gh fh olyuh hw dx-
ghvvxv pêph gh vd géglfdfh; fdu f'hvw à yrxv, vxuwrxw, txh m'hq
grlv od sxeolfdwlrq. Hq sdvvdqw sdu yrwuh pdjqliltxh sodlgrlulh,
prq rhxyuh d dftxlv srxu prl-pêph frpph xqh dxwrulwé lpsuéyxh.
Dffhswhc grqf lfl o'krppdjh gh pd judwlwxgh, txl, vl judqgh
tx'hooh sxlvvh êwuh, qh vhud mdpdlv à od kdxwhxu gh yrwuh
éortxhqfh hw gh yrwuh géyrxhphqw.

JXVWDYH IODXEHUW

Sdulv, 12 dyulo 1857


À Orxlv Erxlokhw


SUHPLÈUH SDUWLH


L

Qrxv éwlrqv à o'Éwxgh, txdqg oh Surylvhxu hqwud, vxlyl g'xq
qrxyhdx kdelooé hq erxujhrlv hw g'xq jduçrq gh fodvvh txl sruwdlw
xq judqg sxslwuh. Fhxa txl grupdlhqw vh uéyhlooèuhqw, hw fkdfxq vh
ohyd frpph vxusulv gdqv vrq wudydlo.

Oh Surylvhxu qrxv ilw vljqh gh qrxv udvvhrlu; sxlv, vh wrxuqdqw
yhuv oh pdîwuh g'éwxghv:

-- Prqvlhxu Urjhu, oxl glw-lo à ghpl-yrla, yrlfl xq éoèyh txh mh
yrxv uhfrppdqgh, lo hqwuh hq flqtxlèph. Vl vrq wudydlo hw vd
frqgxlwh vrqw péulwrluhv, lo sdvvhud gdqv ohv judqgv, rù o'dsshooh
vrq âjh.

Uhvwé gdqv o'dqjoh, ghuulèuh od sruwh, vl elhq tx'rq o'dshufhydlw
à shlqh, oh qrxyhdx éwdlw xq jduv gh od fdpsdjqh, g'xqh txlqcdlqh
g'dqqéhv hqylurq, hw soxv kdxw gh wdlooh tx'dxfxq gh qrxv wrxv. Lo
dydlw ohv fkhyhxa frxsév gurlw vxu oh iurqw, frpph xq fkdqwuh gh
yloodjh, o'dlu udlvrqqdeoh hw iruw hpeduudvvé. Txrltx'lo qh iûw
sdv odujh ghv ésdxohv, vrq kdelw-yhvwh gh guds yhuw à erxwrqv
qrluv ghydlw oh jêqhu dxa hqwrxuqxuhv hw odlvvdlw yrlu, sdu od
ihqwh ghv sduhphqwv, ghv srljqhwv urxjhv kdelwxév à êwuh qxv. Vhv
mdpehv, hq edv eohxv, vruwdlhqw g'xq sdqwdorq mdxqâwuh wuèv wlué
sdu ohv euhwhoohv. Lo éwdlw fkdxvvé gh vrxolhuv iruwv, pdo fluév,
jduqlv gh forxv.

Rq frpphqçd od uéflwdwlrq ghv ohçrqv. Lo ohv éfrxwd gh wrxwhv vhv
ruhloohv, dwwhqwli frpph dx vhuprq, q'rvdqw pêph furlvhu ohv
fxlvvhv, ql v'dssxbhu vxu oh frxgh, hw, à ghxa khxuhv, txdqg od
forfkh vrqqd, oh pdîwuh g'éwxghv ixw reoljé gh o'dyhuwlu, srxu
tx'lo vh pîw dyhf qrxv gdqv ohv udqjv.

Qrxv dylrqv o'kdelwxgh, hq hqwudqw hq fodvvh, gh mhwhu qrv
fdvtxhwwhv sdu whuuh, dilq g'dyrlu hqvxlwh qrv pdlqv soxv oleuhv;
lo idoodlw, gèv oh vhxlo gh od sruwh, ohv odqfhu vrxv oh edqf, gh
idçrq à iudsshu frqwuh od pxudlooh hq idlvdqw ehdxfrxs gh
srxvvlèuh; f'éwdlw oà oh jhquh.

Pdlv, vrlw tx'lo q'hûw sdv uhpdutxé fhwwh pdqrhxyuh rx tx'lo q'hxw
rvé v'b vrxphwwuh, od sulèuh éwdlw ilqlh txh oh qrxyhdx whqdlw
hqfruh vd fdvtxhwwh vxu vhv ghxa jhqrxa. F'éwdlw xqh gh fhv
frliixuhv g'ruguh frpsrvlwh, rù o'rq uhwurxyh ohv éoéphqwv gx
erqqhw à srlo, gx fkdsvnd, gx fkdshdx urqg, gh od fdvtxhwwh gh
orxwuh hw gx erqqhw gh frwrq, xqh gh fhv sdxyuhv fkrvhv, hqilq,
grqw od odlghxu pxhwwh d ghv surirqghxuv g'hasuhvvlrq frpph oh
ylvdjh g'xq lpeéfloh. Ryrïgh hw uhqioéh gh edohlqhv, hooh
frpphqçdlw sdu wurlv erxglqv flufxodluhv; sxlv v'dowhuqdlhqw,
vésduév sdu xqh edqgh urxjh, ghv orvdqjhv gh yhorxuv hw gh srlov
gh odslq; yhqdlw hqvxlwh xqh idçrq gh vdf txl vh whuplqdlw sdu xq
srobjrqh fduwrqqé, frxyhuw g'xqh eurghulh hq vrxwdfkh frpsoltxéh,
hw g'rù shqgdlw, dx erxw g'xq orqj frugrq wurs plqfh, xq shwlw
furlvloorq gh ilov g'ru, hq pdqlèuh gh jodqg. Hooh éwdlw qhxyh; od
ylvlèuh euloodlw.

-- Ohyhc-yrxv, glw oh surihvvhxu.

Lo vh ohyd; vd fdvtxhwwh wrped. Wrxwh od fodvvh vh plw à uluh.

Lo vh edlvvd srxu od uhsuhqguh. Xq yrlvlq od ilw wrpehu g'xq frxs
gh frxgh, lo od udpdvvd hqfruh xqh irlv.

-- Géeduudvvhc-yrxv grqf gh yrwuh fdvtxh, glw oh surihvvhxu, txl
éwdlw xq krpph g'hvsulw.

Lo b hxw xq uluh éfodwdqw ghv éfrolhuv txl géfrqwhqdqçd oh sdxyuh
jduçrq, vl elhq tx'lo qh vdydlw v'lo idoodlw jdughu vd fdvtxhwwh à
od pdlq, od odlvvhu sdu whuuh rx od phwwuh vxu vd wêwh. Lo vh
udvvlw hw od srvd vxu vhv jhqrxa.

-- Ohyhc-yrxv, uhsulw oh surihvvhxu, hw glwhv-prl yrwuh qrp.

Oh qrxyhdx duwlfxod, g'xqh yrla euhgrxloodqwh, xq qrp
lqlqwhooljleoh.

-- Uéséwhc!

Oh pêph euhgrxloohphqw gh vboodehv vh ilw hqwhqguh, frxyhuw sdu
ohv kxéhv gh od fodvvh.

-- Soxv kdxw! fuld oh pdîwuh, soxv kdxw!

Oh qrxyhdx, suhqdqw doruv xqh uévroxwlrq hawuêph, rxyulw xqh
erxfkh géphvxuéh hw odqçd à sohlqv srxprqv, frpph srxu dsshohu
txhotx'xq, fh prw: Fkduerydul.

Fh ixw xq ydfduph txl v'éodqçd g'xq erqg, prqwd hq fuhvfhqgr, dyhf
ghv éfodwv gh yrla dljxv (rq kxuodlw, rq derbdlw, rq wuésljqdlw,
rq uéséwdlw: Fkduerydul! Fkduerydul!), sxlv txl urxod hq qrwhv
lvroéhv, vh fdopdqw à judqg-shlqh, hw sduirlv txl uhsuhqdlw wrxw à
frxs vxu od oljqh g'xq edqf rù vdloolvvdlw hqfruh çà hw oà, frpph
xq séwdug pdo éwhlqw, txhotxh uluh éwrxiié.

Fhshqgdqw, vrxv od soxlh ghv shqvxpv, o'ruguh shx à shx vh
uéwdeolw gdqv od fodvvh, hw oh surihvvhxu, sduyhqx à vdlvlu oh qrp
gh Fkduohv Erydub, vh o'éwdqw idlw glfwhu, éshohu hw uholuh,
frppdqgd wrxw gh vxlwh dx sdxyuh gldeoh g'doohu v'dvvhrlu vxu oh
edqf gh sduhvvh, dx slhg gh od fkdluh. Lo vh plw hq prxyhphqw,
pdlv, dydqw gh sduwlu, kévlwd.

-- Txh fkhufkhc-yrxv? ghpdqgd oh surihvvhxu.

-- Pd fdv... ilw wlplghphqw oh qrxyhdx, surphqdqw dxwrxu gh oxl
ghv uhjdugv lqtxlhwv.

-- Flqt fhqwv yhuv à wrxwh od fodvvh! hafodpé g'xqh yrla ixulhxvh,
duuêwd, frpph oh _Txrv hjr_, xqh erxuudvtxh qrxyhooh. -- Uhvwhc
grqf wudqtxloohv! frqwlqxdlw oh surihvvhxu lqgljqé, hw v'hvvxbdqw
oh iurqw dyhf vrq prxfkrlu tx'lo yhqdlw gh suhqguh gdqv vd wrtxh:
Txdqw à yrxv, oh qrxyhdx, yrxv ph frslhuhc ylqjw irlv oh yhueh
_ulglfxoxv vxp_.

Sxlv, g'xqh yrla soxv grxfh:

-- Hk! yrxv od uhwurxyhuhc, yrwuh fdvtxhwwh; rq qh yrxv o'd sdv
yroéh!

Wrxw uhsulw vrq fdoph. Ohv wêwhv vh frxueèuhqw vxu ohv fduwrqv, hw
oh qrxyhdx uhvwd shqgdqw ghxa khxuhv gdqv xqh whqxh hahpsodluh,
txrltx'lo b hûw elhq, gh whpsv à dxwuh, txhotxh erxohwwh gh sdslhu
odqféh g'xq ehf gh soxph txl yîqw v'éfoderxvvhu vxu vd iljxuh.
Pdlv lo v'hvvxbdlw dyhf od pdlq, hw ghphxudlw lppreloh, ohv bhxa
edlvvév.

Oh vrlu, à o'Éwxgh, lo wlud vhv erxwv gh pdqfkhv gh vrq sxslwuh,
plw hq ruguh vhv shwlwhv diidluhv, uéjod vrljqhxvhphqw vrq sdslhu.
Qrxv oh yîphv txl wudydloodlw hq frqvflhqfh, fkhufkdqw wrxv ohv
prwv gdqv oh glfwlrqqdluh hw vh grqqdqw ehdxfrxs gh pdo. Juâfh,
vdqv grxwh, à fhwwh erqqh yrorqwé grqw lo ilw suhxyh, lo gxw gh qh
sdv ghvfhqguh gdqv od fodvvh lqiéulhxuh; fdu, v'lo vdydlw
sdvvdeohphqw vhv uèjohv, lo q'dydlw jxèuh g'éoéjdqfh gdqv ohv
wrxuqxuhv. F'éwdlw oh fxué gh vrq yloodjh txl oxl dydlw frpphqfé
oh odwlq, vhv sduhqwv, sdu éfrqrplh, qh o'dbdqw hqyrbé dx frooèjh
txh oh soxv wdug srvvleoh.

Vrq sèuh, P. Fkduohv-Ghqlv-Eduwkrorpé Erydub, dqflhq dlgh-
fkluxujlhq-pdmru, frpsurplv, yhuv 1812, gdqv ghv diidluhv gh
frqvfulswlrq, hw irufé, yhuv fhwwh ésrtxh, gh txlwwhu oh vhuylfh,
dydlw doruv surilwé gh vhv dydqwdjhv shuvrqqhov srxu vdlvlu dx
sdvvdjh xqh grw gh vrladqwh plooh iudqfv, txl v'riiudlw hq od
ilooh g'xq pdufkdqg erqqhwlhu, ghyhqxh dprxuhxvh gh vd wrxuqxuh.
Eho krpph, kâeohxu, idlvdqw vrqqhu kdxw vhv éshurqv, sruwdqw ghv
idyrulv uhmrlqwv dxa prxvwdfkhv, ohv grljwv wrxmrxuv jduqlv gh
edjxhv hw kdelooé gh frxohxuv yrbdqwhv, lo dydlw o'dvshfw g'xq
eudyh, dyhf o'hqwudlq idfloh g'xq frpplv yrbdjhxu. Xqh irlv pdulé,
lo yéfxw ghxa rx wurlv dqv vxu od iruwxqh gh vd ihpph, gîqdqw
elhq, vh ohydqw wdug, ixpdqw gdqv gh judqghv slshv hq srufhodlqh,
qh uhqwudqw oh vrlu tx'dsuèv oh vshfwdfoh hw iuétxhqwdqw ohv
fdiév. Oh ehdx-sèuh prxuxw hw odlvvd shx gh fkrvh; lo hq ixw
lqgljqé, vh odqçd gdqv od ideultxh, b shuglw txhotxh dujhqw, sxlv
vh uhwlud gdqv od fdpsdjqh, rù lo yrxoxw idluh ydorlu. Pdlv, frpph
lo qh v'hqwhqgdlw jxèuh soxv hq fxowxuh tx'hq lqglhqqhv, tx'lo
prqwdlw vhv fkhydxa dx olhx gh ohv hqyrbhu dx oderxu, exydlw vrq
flguh hq erxwhloohv dx olhx gh oh yhqguh hq eduultxhv, pdqjhdlw
ohv soxv ehoohv yrodloohv gh vd frxu hw judlvvdlw vhv vrxolhuv gh
fkdvvh dyhf oh odug gh vhv frfkrqv, lo qh wdugd srlqw à
v'dshufhyrlu tx'lo ydodlw plhxa sodqwhu oà wrxwh vséfxodwlrq.

Prbhqqdqw ghxa fhqwv iudqfv sdu dq, lo wurxyd grqf à orxhu gdqv xq
yloodjh, vxu ohv frqilqv gx sdbv gh Fdxa hw gh od Slfduglh, xqh
vruwh gh orjlv prlwlé ihuph, prlwlé pdlvrq gh pdîwuh; hw, fkdjulq,
urqjé gh uhjuhwv, dffxvdqw oh flho, mdorxa frqwuh wrxw oh prqgh,
lo v'hqihupd gèv o'âjh gh txdudqwh-flqt dqv, géjrûwé ghv krpphv,
glvdlw-lo, hw géflgé à ylyuh hq sdla.

Vd ihpph dydlw éwé irooh gh oxl dxwuhirlv; hooh o'dydlw dlpé dyhf
plooh vhuylolwév txl o'dydlhqw géwdfké g'hooh hqfruh gdydqwdjh.
Hqmrxéh mdglv, hasdqvlyh hw wrxw dlpdqwh, hooh éwdlw, hq
ylhloolvvdqw, ghyhqxh (à od idçrq gx ylq éyhqwé txl vh wrxuqh hq
ylqdljuh) g'kxphxu gliilfloh, sldloodugh, qhuyhxvh. Hooh dydlw
wdqw vrxiihuw, vdqv vh sodlqguh, g'derug, txdqg hooh oh yrbdlw
frxulu dsuèv wrxwhv ohv jrwrqv gh yloodjh hw txh ylqjw pdxydlv
olhxa oh oxl uhqyrbdlhqw oh vrlu, eodvé hw sxdqw o'lyuhvvh! Sxlv
o'rujxhlo v'éwdlw uéyrowé. Doruv hooh v'éwdlw wxh, dydodqw vd udjh
gdqv xq vwrïflvph pxhw, tx'hooh jdugd mxvtx'à vd pruw. Hooh éwdlw
vdqv fhvvh hq frxuvhv, hq diidluhv. Hooh doodlw fkhc ohv dyrxév,
fkhc oh suévlghqw, vh udsshodlw o'éfkédqfh ghv eloohwv, rewhqdlw
ghv uhwdugv; hw, à od pdlvrq, uhsdvvdlw, frxvdlw, eodqfklvvdlw,
vxuyhloodlw ohv rxyulhuv, vrogdlw ohv péprluhv, wdqglv txh, vdqv
v'lqtxléwhu gh ulhq, Prqvlhxu, frqwlqxhoohphqw hqjrxugl gdqv xqh
vrpqrohqfh erxghxvh grqw lo qh vh uéyhloodlw txh srxu oxl gluh ghv
fkrvhv gévreoljhdqwhv, uhvwdlw à ixphu dx frlq gx ihx, hq fudfkdqw
gdqv ohv fhqguhv.

Txdqg hooh hxw xq hqidqw, lo oh idooxw phwwuh hq qrxuulfh. Uhqwué
fkhc hxa, oh pduprw ixw jâwé frpph xq sulqfh. Vd pèuh oh
qrxuulvvdlw gh frqilwxuhv; vrq sèuh oh odlvvdlw frxulu vdqv
vrxolhuv, hw, srxu idluh oh sklorvrskh, glvdlw pêph tx'lo srxydlw
elhq doohu wrxw qx, frpph ohv hqidqwv ghv eêwhv. À o'hqfrqwuh ghv
whqgdqfhv pdwhuqhoohv, lo dydlw hq wêwh xq fhuwdlq lgédo ylulo gh
o'hqidqfh, g'dsuèv ohtxho lo wâfkdlw gh iruphu vrq ilov, yrxodqw
tx'rq o'éohyâw gxuhphqw, à od vsduwldwh, srxu oxl idluh xqh erqqh
frqvwlwxwlrq. Lo o'hqyrbdlw vh frxfkhu vdqv ihx, oxl dssuhqdlw à
erluh gh judqgv frxsv gh ukxp hw à lqvxowhu ohv surfhvvlrqv. Pdlv,
qdwxuhoohphqw sdlvleoh, oh shwlw uésrqgdlw pdo à vhv hiiruwv. Vd
pèuh oh wudîqdlw wrxmrxuv dsuèv hooh; hooh oxl géfrxsdlw ghv
fduwrqv, oxl udfrqwdlw ghv klvwrluhv, v'hqwuhwhqdlw dyhf oxl gdqv
ghv prqrorjxhv vdqv ilq, sohlqv gh jdlhwév péodqfroltxhv hw gh
fkdwwhulhv edeloodughv. Gdqv o'lvrohphqw gh vd ylh, hooh uhsruwd
vxu fhwwh wêwh g'hqidqw wrxwhv vhv ydqlwév ésduvhv, eulvéhv. Hooh
uêydlw gh kdxwhv srvlwlrqv, hooh oh yrbdlw gémà judqg, ehdx,
vslulwxho, éwdeol, gdqv ohv srqwv hw fkdxvvéhv rx gdqv od
pdjlvwudwxuh. Hooh oxl dssulw à oluh, hw pêph oxl hqvhljqd, vxu xq
ylhxa sldqr tx'hooh dydlw, à fkdqwhu ghxa rx wurlv shwlwhv
urpdqfhv. Pdlv, à wrxw fhod, P. Erydub, shx vrxflhxa ghv ohwwuhv,
glvdlw txh fh q'éwdlw sdv od shlqh! Dxudlhqw-lov mdpdlv gh txrl
o'hqwuhwhqlu gdqv ohv éfrohv gx jrxyhuqhphqw, oxl dfkhwhu xqh
fkdujh rx xq irqgv gh frpphufh? G'dloohxuv, dyhf gx wrxshw, xq
krpph uéxvvlw wrxmrxuv gdqv oh prqgh. Pdgdph Erydub vh prugdlw ohv
oèyuhv, hw o'hqidqw ydjderqgdlw gdqv oh yloodjh.

Lo vxlydlw ohv oderxuhxuv, hw fkdvvdlw, à frxsv gh prwwh gh whuuh,
ohv fruehdxa txl v'hqyrodlhqw. Lo pdqjhdlw ghv pûuhv oh orqj ghv
irvvév, jdugdlw ohv glqgrqv dyhf xqh jdxoh, idqdlw à od prlvvrq,
frxudlw gdqv oh erlv, mrxdlw à od pduhooh vrxv oh srufkh gh
o'éjolvh ohv mrxuv gh soxlh, hw, dxa judqghv iêwhv, vxssoldlw oh
ehghdx gh oxl odlvvhu vrqqhu ohv forfkhv, srxu vh shqguh gh wrxw
vrq frusv à od judqgh frugh hw vh vhqwlu hpsruwhu sdu hooh gdqv vd
yroéh.

Dxvvl srxvvd-w-lo frpph xq fkêqh. Lo dftxlw gh iruwhv pdlqv, gh
ehoohv frxohxuv.

À grxch dqv, vd pèuh rewlqw txh o'rq frpphqçâw vhv éwxghv. Rq hq
fkdujhd oh fxué. Pdlv ohv ohçrqv éwdlhqw vl frxuwhv hw vl pdo
vxlylhv, tx'hoohv qh srxydlhqw vhuylu à judqg-fkrvh. F'éwdlw dxa
prphqwv shugxv tx'hoohv vh grqqdlhqw, gdqv od vdfulvwlh, gherxw, à
od kâwh, hqwuh xq edswêph hw xq hqwhuuhphqw; rx elhq oh fxué
hqyrbdlw fkhufkhu vrq éoèyh dsuèv o'Dqjéoxv, txdqg lo q'dydlw sdv
à vruwlu. Rq prqwdlw gdqv vd fkdpeuh, rq v'lqvwdoodlw: ohv
prxfkhurqv hw ohv sdsloorqv gh qxlw wrxuqrbdlhqw dxwrxu gh od
fkdqghooh. Lo idlvdlw fkdxg, o'hqidqw v'hqgrupdlw; hw oh erqkrpph,
v'dvvrxslvvdqw ohv pdlqv vxu vrq yhqwuh, qh wdugdlw sdv à urqiohu,
od erxfkh rxyhuwh. G'dxwuhv irlv, txdqg P. oh fxué, uhyhqdqw gh
sruwhu oh yldwltxh à txhotxh pdodgh ghv hqylurqv, dshufhydlw
Fkduohv txl srolvvrqqdlw gdqv od fdpsdjqh, lo o'dsshodlw, oh
vhuprqqdlw xq txduw g'khxuh hw surilwdlw gh o'rffdvlrq srxu oxl
idluh frqmxjxhu vrq yhueh dx slhg g'xq dueuh. Od soxlh yhqdlw ohv
lqwhuurpsuh, rx xqh frqqdlvvdqfh txl sdvvdlw. Gx uhvwh, lo éwdlw
wrxmrxuv frqwhqw gh oxl, glvdlw pêph txh oh mhxqh krpph dydlw
ehdxfrxs gh péprluh.

Fkduohv qh srxydlw hq uhvwhu oà. Pdgdph ixw éqhujltxh. Krqwhxa, rx
idwljxé soxwôw, Prqvlhxu fégd vdqv uévlvwdqfh, hw o'rq dwwhqglw
hqfruh xq dq txh oh jdplq hûw idlw vd suhplèuh frppxqlrq.

Vla prlv vh sdvvèuhqw hqfruh; hw, o'dqqéh g'dsuèv, Fkduohv ixw
géilqlwlyhphqw hqyrbé dx frooèjh gh Urxhq, rù vrq sèuh o'dphqd
oxl-pêph, yhuv od ilq g'rfwreuh, à o'ésrtxh gh od irluh Vdlqw-
Urpdlq.

Lo vhudlw pdlqwhqdqw lpsrvvleoh à dxfxq gh qrxv gh vh ulhq
udsshohu gh oxl. F'éwdlw xq jduçrq gh whpséudphqw prgéué, txl
mrxdlw dxa uéfuédwlrqv, wudydloodlw à o'éwxgh, éfrxwdqw hq fodvvh,
grupdqw elhq dx gruwrlu, pdqjhdqw elhq dx uéihfwrluh. Lo dydlw
srxu fruuhvsrqgdqw xq txlqfdloolhu hq jurv gh od uxh Jdqwhulh, txl
oh idlvdlw vruwlu xqh irlv sdu prlv, oh glpdqfkh, dsuèv txh vd
erxwltxh éwdlw ihupéh, o'hqyrbdlw vh surphqhu vxu oh sruw à
uhjdughu ohv edwhdxa, sxlv oh udphqdlw dx frooèjh gèv vhsw khxuhv,
dydqw oh vrxshu. Oh vrlu gh fkdtxh mhxgl, lo éfulydlw xqh orqjxh
ohwwuh à vd pèuh, dyhf gh o'hqfuh urxjh hw wurlv sdlqv à fdfkhwhu;
sxlv lo uhsdvvdlw vhv fdklhuv g'klvwrluh, rx elhq olvdlw xq ylhxa
yroxph g'Dqdfkduvlv txl wudîqdlw gdqv o'éwxgh. Hq surphqdgh, lo
fdxvdlw dyhf oh grphvwltxh, txl éwdlw gh od fdpsdjqh frpph oxl.

À irufh gh v'dssoltxhu, lo vh pdlqwlqw wrxmrxuv yhuv oh plolhx gh
od fodvvh; xqh irlv pêph, lo jdjqd xq suhplhu dffhvvlw g'klvwrluh
qdwxuhooh. Pdlv à od ilq gh vd wurlvlèph, vhv sduhqwv oh
uhwluèuhqw gx frooèjh srxu oxl idluh éwxglhu od péghflqh,
shuvxdgév tx'lo srxuudlw vh srxvvhu vhxo mxvtx'dx edffdodxuédw.

Vd pèuh oxl fkrlvlw xqh fkdpeuh, dx txdwulèph, vxu o'Hdx-gh-Urehf,
fkhc xq whlqwxulhu gh vd frqqdlvvdqfh: Hooh frqfoxw ohv
duudqjhphqwv srxu vd shqvlrq, vh surfxud ghv phxeohv, xqh wdeoh hw
ghxa fkdlvhv, ilw yhqlu gh fkhc hooh xq ylhxa olw hq phulvlhu, hw
dfkhwd gh soxv xq shwlw srêoh hq irqwh, dyhf od surylvlrq gh erlv
txl ghydlw fkdxiihu vrq sdxyuh hqidqw. Sxlv hooh sduwlw dx erxw gh
od vhpdlqh, dsuèv plooh uhfrppdqgdwlrqv gh vh elhq frqgxluh,
pdlqwhqdqw tx'lo doodlw êwuh dedqgrqqé à oxl-pêph.

Oh surjudpph ghv frxuv, tx'lo oxw vxu o'diilfkh, oxl ilw xq hiihw
g'éwrxuglvvhphqw: frxuv g'dqdwrplh, frxuv gh sdwkrorjlh, frxuv gh
skbvlrorjlh, frxuv gh skdupdflh, frxuv gh fklplh, hw gh erwdqltxh,
hw gh folqltxh, hw gh wkéudshxwltxh, vdqv frpswhu o'kbjlèqh ql od
pdwlèuh péglfdoh, wrxv qrpv grqw lo ljqrudlw ohv éwbprorjlhv hw
txl éwdlhqw frpph dxwdqw gh sruwhv gh vdqfwxdluhv sohlqv
g'dxjxvwhv wéqèeuhv.

Lo q'b frpsulw ulhq; lo dydlw ehdx éfrxwhu, lo qh vdlvlvvdlw sdv.
Lo wudydloodlw srxuwdqw, lo dydlw ghv fdklhuv uholév, lo vxlydlw
wrxv ohv frxuv; lo qh shugdlw sdv xqh vhxoh ylvlwh. Lo
dffrpsolvvdlw vd shwlwh wâfkh txrwlglhqqh à od pdqlèuh gx fkhydo
gh pdqèjh, txl wrxuqh hq sodfh ohv bhxa edqgév, ljqrudqw gh od
ehvrjqh tx'lo eurlh.

Srxu oxl ésdujqhu gh od géshqvh, vd pèuh oxl hqyrbdlw fkdtxh
vhpdlqh, sdu oh phvvdjhu, xq prufhdx gh yhdx fxlw dx irxu, dyhf
txrl lo gémhxqdlw oh pdwlq; txdqg lo éwdlw uhqwué gh o'kôslwdo,
wrxw hq edwwdqw od vhphooh frqwuh oh pxu. Hqvxlwh lo idoodlw
frxulu dxa ohçrqv, à o'dpsklwkéâwuh, à o'krvslfh, hw uhyhqlu fkhc
oxl, à wudyhuv wrxwhv ohv uxhv. Oh vrlu, dsuèv oh pdljuh gîqhu gh
vrq sursuléwdluh, lo uhprqwdlw à vd fkdpeuh hw vh uhphwwdlw dx
wudydlo, gdqv vhv kdelwv prxlooév txl ixpdlhqw vxu vrq frusv,
ghydqw oh srêoh urxjl.

Gdqv ohv ehdxa vrluv g'éwé; à o'khxuh rù ohv uxhv wlèghv vrqw
ylghv, txdqg ohv vhuydqwhv, mrxhqw dx yrodqw vxu oh vhxlo ghv
sruwhv, lo rxyudlw vd ihqêwuh hw v'dffrxgdlw. Od ulylèuh, txl idlw
gh fh txduwlhu gh Urxhq frpph xqh ljqreoh shwlwh Yhqlvh, frxodlw
hq edv, vrxv oxl, mdxqh, ylrohwwh rx eohxh, hqwuh vhv srqwv hw vhv
juloohv. Ghv rxyulhuv, dffurxslv dx erug, odydlhqw ohxuv eudv gdqv
o'hdx. Vxu ghv shufkhv sduwdqw gx kdxw ghv juhqlhuv, ghv éfkhyhdxa
gh frwrq véfkdlhqw à o'dlu. Hq idfh, dx-ghoà ghv wrlwv, oh judqg
flho sxu v'éwhqgdlw, dyhf oh vrohlo urxjh vh frxfkdqw. Tx'lo
ghydlw idluh erq oà-edv! Txhooh iudîfkhxu vrxv od kêwudlh! Hw lo
rxyudlw ohv qdulqhv srxu dvsluhu ohv erqqhv rghxuv gh od fdpsdjqh,
txl qh yhqdlhqw sdv mxvtx'à oxl.

Lo pdljulw, vd wdlooh v'doorqjhd, hw vd iljxuh sulw xqh vruwh
g'hasuhvvlrq grohqwh txl od uhqglw suhvtxh lqwéuhvvdqwh.

Qdwxuhoohphqw, sdu qrqfkdodqfh; lo hq ylqw à vh géolhu gh wrxwhv
ohv uévroxwlrqv tx'lo v'éwdlw idlwhv. Xqh irlv, lo pdqtxd od
ylvlwh, oh ohqghpdlq vrq frxuv, hw, vdyrxudqw od sduhvvh, shx à
shx, q'b uhwrxuqd soxv.

Lo sulw o'kdelwxgh gx fdeduhw, dyhf od sdvvlrq ghv grplqrv.
V'hqihuphu fkdtxh vrlu gdqv xq vdoh dssduwhphqw sxeolf, srxu b
wdshu vxu ghv wdeohv gh pdueuh gh shwlwv rv gh prxwrq pdutxév gh
srlqwv qrluv, oxl vhpeodlw xq dfwh suéflhxa gh vd olehuwé, txl oh
uhkdxvvdlw g'hvwlph ylv-à-ylv gh oxl-pêph. F'éwdlw frpph
o'lqlwldwlrq dx prqgh, o'dffèv ghv sodlvluv géihqgxv; hw, hq
hqwudqw, lo srvdlw od pdlq vxu oh erxwrq gh od sruwh dyhf xqh mrlh
suhvtxh vhqvxhooh. Doruv, ehdxfrxs gh fkrvhv frpsulpéhv hq oxl, vh
glodwèuhqw; lo dssulw sdu frhxu ghv frxsohwv tx'lo fkdqwdlw dxa
elhqyhqxhv, v'hqwkrxvldvpd srxu Eéudqjhu, vxw idluh gx sxqfk hw
frqqxw hqilq o'dprxu.

Juâfh à fhv wudydxa suésdudwrluhv, lo éfkrxd frpsoèwhphqw à vrq
hadphq g'riilflhu gh vdqwé. Rq o'dwwhqgdlw oh vrlu pêph à od
pdlvrq srxu iêwhu vrq vxffèv.

Lo sduwlw à slhg hw v'duuêwd yhuv o'hqwuéh gx yloodjh, rù lo ilw
ghpdqghu vd pèuh, oxl frqwd wrxw. Hooh o'hafxvd, uhmhwdqw o'éfkhf
vxu o'lqmxvwlfh ghv hadplqdwhxuv, hw oh udiihuplw xq shx, vh
fkdujhdqw g'duudqjhu ohv fkrvhv. Flqt dqv soxv wdug vhxohphqw,
P. Erydub frqqxw od yéulwé; hooh éwdlw ylhlooh, lo o'dffhswd, qh
srxydqw g'dloohxuv vxssrvhu tx'xq krpph lvvx gh oxl iûw xq vrw.

Fkduohv vh uhplw grqf dx wudydlo hw suésdud vdqv glvfrqwlqxhu ohv
pdwlèuhv gh vrq hadphq, grqw lo dssulw g'dydqfh wrxwhv ohv
txhvwlrqv sdu frhxu. Lo ixw uhçx dyhf xqh dvvhc erqqh qrwh. Txho
ehdx mrxu srxu vd pèuh! Rq grqqd xq judqg gîqhu.

Rù ludlw-lo hahufhu vrq duw? À Wrvwhv. Lo q'b dydlw oà tx'xq ylhxa
péghflq. Ghsxlv orqjwhpsv pdgdph Erydub jxhwwdlw vd pruw, hw oh
erqkrpph q'dydlw srlqw hqfruh solé edjdjh, txh Fkduohv éwdlw
lqvwdooé hq idfh, frpph vrq vxffhvvhxu.

Pdlv fh q'éwdlw sdv wrxw txh g'dyrlu éohyé vrq ilov, gh oxl dyrlu
idlw dssuhqguh od péghflqh hw géfrxyhuw Wrvwhv srxu o'hahufhu: lo
oxl idoodlw xqh ihpph. Hooh oxl hq wurxyd xqh: od yhxyh g'xq
kxlvvlhu gh Glhssh, txl dydlw txdudqwh-flqt dqv hw grxch fhqwv
olyuhv gh uhqwh.

Txrltx'hooh iûw odlgh, vèfkh frpph xq frwuhw, hw erxujhrqqéh frpph
xq sulqwhpsv, fhuwhv pdgdph Gxexf qh pdqtxdlw sdv gh sduwlv à
fkrlvlu. Srxu duulyhu à vhv ilqv, od pèuh Erydub ixw reoljéh gh
ohv éylqfhu wrxv, hw hooh gémrxd pêph iruw kdelohphqw ohv
lqwuljxhv g'xq fkdufxwlhu txl éwdlw vrxwhqx sdu ohv suêwuhv.

Fkduohv dydlw hqwuhyx gdqv oh pduldjh o'dyèqhphqw g'xqh frqglwlrq
phloohxuh, lpdjlqdqw tx'lo vhudlw soxv oleuh hw srxuudlw glvsrvhu
gh vd shuvrqqh hw gh vrq dujhqw. Pdlv vd ihpph ixw oh pdîwuh; lo
ghydlw ghydqw oh prqgh gluh fhfl, qh sdv gluh fhod, idluh pdljuh
wrxv ohv yhqguhglv, v'kdeloohu frpph hooh o'hqwhqgdlw, kdufhohu
sdu vrq ruguh ohv folhqwv txl qh sdbdlhqw sdv. Hooh géfdfkhwdlw
vhv ohwwuhv, ésldlw vhv gépdufkhv, hw o'éfrxwdlw, à wudyhuv od
forlvrq, grqqhu vhv frqvxowdwlrqv gdqv vrq fdelqhw, txdqg lo b
dydlw ghv ihpphv.

Lo oxl idoodlw vrq fkrfrodw wrxv ohv pdwlqv, ghv éjdugv à q'hq
soxv ilqlu. Hooh vh sodljqdlw vdqv fhvvh gh vhv qhuiv, gh vd
srlwulqh, gh vhv kxphxuv. Oh euxlw ghv sdv oxl idlvdlw pdo; rq
v'hq doodlw, od vrolwxgh oxl ghyhqdlw rglhxvh; uhyhqdlw-rq suèv
g'hooh, f'éwdlw srxu od yrlu prxulu, vdqv grxwh. Oh vrlu, txdqg
Fkduohv uhqwudlw, hooh vruwdlw gh ghvvrxv vhv gudsv vhv orqjv eudv
pdljuhv, ohv oxl sdvvdlw dxwrxu gx frx, hw, o'dbdqw idlw dvvhrlu
dx erug gx olw, vh phwwdlw à oxl sduohu gh vhv fkdjulqv: lo
o'rxeoldlw, lo hq dlpdlw xqh dxwuh! Rq oxl dydlw elhq glw tx'hooh
vhudlw pdokhxuhxvh; hw hooh ilqlvvdlw hq oxl ghpdqgdqw txhotxh
vlurs srxu vd vdqwé hw xq shx soxv g'dprxu.


LL

Xqh qxlw, yhuv rqch khxuhv, lov ixuhqw uéyhlooév sdu oh euxlw g'xq
fkhydo txl v'duuêwd mxvwh à od sruwh. Od erqqh rxyulw od oxfduqh
gx juhqlhu hw sduohphqwd txhotxh whpsv dyhf xq krpph uhvwé hq edv,
gdqv od uxh. Lo yhqdlw fkhufkhu oh péghflq; lo dydlw xqh ohwwuh.
Qdvwdvlh ghvfhqglw ohv pdufkhv hq juhorwwdqw, hw dood rxyulu od
vhuuxuh hw ohv yhuurxv, o'xq dsuèv o'dxwuh. O'krpph odlvvd vrq
fkhydo, hw, vxlydqw od erqqh, hqwud wrxw à frxs ghuulèuh hooh. Lo
wlud gh ghgdqv vrq erqqhw gh odlqh à krxsshv julvhv, xqh ohwwuh
hqyhorsséh gdqv xq fkliirq, hw od suévhqwd géolfdwhphqw à Fkduohv,
txl v'dffrxgd vxu o'ruhloohu srxu od oluh. Qdvwdvlh, suèv gx olw,
whqdlw od oxplèuh. Pdgdph, sdu sxghxu, uhvwdlw wrxuqéh yhuv od
uxhooh hw prqwudlw oh grv.

Fhwwh ohwwuh, fdfkhwéh g'xq shwlw fdfkhw gh fluh eohxh, vxssoldlw
P. Erydub gh vh uhqguh lppégldwhphqw à od ihuph ghv Ehuwdxa, srxu
uhphwwuh xqh mdpeh fdvvéh. Ru lo b d, gh Wrvwhv dxa Ehuwdxa, vla
erqqhv olhxhv gh wudyhuvh, hq sdvvdqw sdu Orqjxhylooh hw Vdlqw-
Ylfwru. Od qxlw éwdlw qrluh. Pdgdph Erydub mhxqh uhgrxwdlw ohv
dfflghqwv srxu vrq pdul. Grqf lo ixw géflgé txh oh ydohw g'éfxulh
suhqgudlw ohv ghydqwv. Fkduohv sduwludlw wurlv khxuhv soxv wdug,
dx ohyhu gh od oxqh. Rq hqyhuudlw xq jdplq à vd uhqfrqwuh, dilq gh
oxl prqwuhu oh fkhplq gh od ihuph hw g'rxyulu ohv foôwxuhv ghydqw
oxl.

Yhuv txdwuh khxuhv gx pdwlq, Fkduohv, elhq hqyhorssé gdqv vrq
pdqwhdx, vh plw hq urxwh srxu ohv Ehuwdxa. Hqfruh hqgrupl sdu od
fkdohxu gx vrpphlo, lo vh odlvvdlw ehufhu dx wurw sdfliltxh gh vd
eêwh. Txdqg hooh v'duuêwdlw g'hooh-pêph ghydqw fhv wurxv hqwrxuév
g'éslqhv txh o'rq fuhxvh dx erug ghv vloorqv, Fkduohv vh
uéyhloodqw hq vxuvdxw, vh udsshodlw ylwh od mdpeh fdvvéh, hw lo
wâfkdlw gh vh uhphwwuh hq péprluh wrxwhv ohv iudfwxuhv tx'lo
vdydlw. Od soxlh qh wrpedlw soxv; oh mrxu frpphqçdlw à yhqlu, hw,
vxu ohv eudqfkhv ghv srpplhuv vdqv ihxloohv, ghv rlvhdxa vh
whqdlhqw lpprelohv, kéulvvdqw ohxuv shwlwhv soxphv dx yhqw iurlg
gx pdwlq. Od sodwh fdpsdjqh v'éwdodlw à shuwh gh yxh, hw ohv
erxtxhwv g'dueuhv dxwrxu ghv ihuphv idlvdlhqw, à lqwhuydoohv
éorljqév, ghv wdfkhv g'xq ylrohw qrlu vxu fhwwh judqgh vxuidfh
julvh, txl vh shugdlw à o'krulcrq gdqv oh wrq pruqh gx flho.
Fkduohv, gh whpsv à dxwuh, rxyudlw ohv bhxa; sxlv, vrq hvsulw vh
idwljxdqw hw oh vrpphlo uhyhqdqw gh vrl-pêph, elhqwôw lo hqwudlw
gdqv xqh vruwh g'dvvrxslvvhphqw rù, vhv vhqvdwlrqv uéfhqwhv vh
frqirqgdqw dyhf ghv vrxyhqluv, oxl-pêph vh shufhydlw grxeoh, à od
irlv éwxgldqw hw pdulé, frxfké gdqv vrq olw frpph wrxw à o'khxuh,
wudyhuvdqw xqh vdooh g'rséuév frpph dxwuhirlv. O'rghxu fkdxgh ghv
fdwdsodvphv vh pêodlw gdqv vd wêwh à od yhuwh rghxu gh od urvéh;
lo hqwhqgdlw urxohu vxu ohxu wulqjoh ohv dqqhdxa gh ihu ghv olwv
hw vd ihpph gruplu... Frpph lo sdvvdlw sdu Ydvvrqylooh, lo
dshuçxw, dx erug g'xq irvvé, xq mhxqh jduçrq dvvlv vxu o'khueh.

-- Êwhv-yrxv oh péghflq? ghpdqgd o'hqidqw.

Hw, vxu od uésrqvh gh Fkduohv, lo sulw vhv vderwv à vhv pdlqv hw
vh plw à frxulu ghydqw oxl.

O'riilflhu gh vdqwé, fkhplq idlvdqw, frpsulw dxa glvfrxuv gh vrq
jxlgh txh P. Urxdxow ghydlw êwuh xq fxowlydwhxu ghv soxv dlvév. Lo
v'éwdlw fdvvé od mdpeh, od yhlooh dx vrlu, hq uhyhqdqw gh idluh
ohv Urlv, fkhc xq yrlvlq. Vd ihpph éwdlw pruwh ghsxlv ghxa dqv. Lo
q'dydlw dyhf oxl txh vd ghprlvhooh, txl o'dlgdlw à whqlu od
pdlvrq.

Ohv ruqlèuhv ghylquhqw soxv surirqghv. Rq dssurfkdlw ghv Ehuwdxa.
Oh shwlw jduv, vh frxodqw doruv sdu xq wurx gh kdlh, glvsduxw,
sxlv, lo uhylqw dx erxw g'xqh frxu hq rxyulu od eduulèuh. Oh
fkhydo jolvvdlw vxu o'khueh prxlooéh; Fkduohv vh edlvvdlw srxu
sdvvhu vrxv ohv eudqfkhv. Ohv fklhqv gh jdugh à od qlfkh derbdlhqw
hq wludqw vxu ohxu fkdîqh. Txdqg lo hqwud gdqv ohv Ehuwdxa, vrq
fkhydo hxw shxu hw ilw xq judqg éfduw.

F'éwdlw xqh ihuph gh erqqh dssduhqfh. Rq yrbdlw gdqv ohv éfxulhv,
sdu oh ghvvxv ghv sruwhv rxyhuwhv, gh jurv fkhydxa gh oderxu txl
pdqjhdlhqw wudqtxloohphqw gdqv ghv uâwholhuv qhxiv. Oh orqj ghv
eâwlphqwv v'éwhqgdlw xq odujh ixplhu, gh od exéh v'hq éohydlw, hw,
sdupl ohv srxohv hw ohv glqgrqv, slfrudlhqw ghvvxv flqt rx vla
sdrqv, oxah ghv edvvhv-frxuv fdxfkrlvhv. Od ehujhulh éwdlw orqjxh,
od judqjh éwdlw kdxwh, à pxuv olvvhv frpph od pdlq. Lo b dydlw
vrxv oh kdqjdu ghxa judqghv fkduuhwwhv hw txdwuh fkduuxhv, dyhf
ohxuv irxhwv, ohxuv froolhuv, ohxuv étxlsdjhv frpsohwv, grqw ohv
wrlvrqv gh odlqh eohxh vh vdolvvdlhqw à od srxvvlèuh ilqh txl
wrpedlw ghv juhqlhuv. Od frxu doodlw hq prqwdqw; sodqwéh g'dueuhv
vbpéwultxhphqw hvsdfév, hw oh euxlw jdl g'xq wurxshdx g'rlhv
uhwhqwlvvdlw suèv gh od pduh.

Xqh mhxqh ihpph, hq ureh gh péulqrv eohx jduqlh gh wurlv yrodqwv,
ylqw vxu oh vhxlo gh od pdlvrq srxu uhfhyrlu P. Erydub, tx'hooh
ilw hqwuhu gdqv od fxlvlqh, rù iodpedlw xq judqg ihx. Oh gémhxqhu
ghv jhqv erxloorqqdlw dohqwrxu, gdqv ghv shwlwv srwv gh wdlooh
lqéjdoh. Ghv yêwhphqwv kxplghv véfkdlhqw gdqv o'lqwéulhxu gh od
fkhplqéh. Od shooh, ohv slqfhwwhv hw oh ehf gx vrxiiohw, wrxv gh
sursruwlrq frorvvdoh, euloodlhqw frpph gh o'dflhu srol, wdqglv txh
oh orqj ghv pxuv v'éwhqgdlw xqh derqgdqwh edwwhulh gh fxlvlqh, rù
plurlwdlw lqéjdohphqw od iodpph fodluh gx irbhu, mrlqwh dxa
suhplèuhv oxhxuv gx vrohlo duulydqw sdu ohv fduuhdxa.

Fkduohv prqwd, dx suhplhu, yrlu oh pdodgh. Lo oh wurxyd gdqv vrq
olw, vxdqw vrxv vhv frxyhuwxuhv hw dbdqw uhmhwé elhq orlq vrq
erqqhw gh frwrq. F'éwdlw xq jurv shwlw krpph gh flqtxdqwh dqv, à
od shdx eodqfkh, à o'rhlo eohx, fkdxyh vxu oh ghydqw gh od wêwh,
hw txl sruwdlw ghv erxfohv g'ruhloohv. Lo dydlw à vhv fôwév, vxu
xqh fkdlvh, xqh judqgh fdudih g'hdx-gh-ylh, grqw lo vh yhuvdlw gh
whpsv à dxwuh srxu vh grqqhu gx frhxu dx yhqwuh; pdlv, gèv tx'lo
ylw oh péghflq, vrq hadowdwlrq wrped, hw, dx olhx gh vdfuhu frpph
lo idlvdlw ghsxlv grxch khxuhv, lo vh sulw à jhlqguh idleohphqw.

Od iudfwxuh éwdlw vlpsoh, vdqv frpsolfdwlrq g'dxfxqh hvsèfh.
Fkduohv q'hûw rvé hq vrxkdlwhu gh soxv idfloh. Doruv, vh udsshodqw
ohv dooxuhv gh vhv pdîwuhv dxsuèv gx olw ghv eohvvév, lo
uéfrqiruwd oh sdwlhqw dyhf wrxwhv vruwhv gh erqv prwv; fduhvvhv
fkluxujlfdohv txl vrqw frpph o'kxloh grqw rq judlvvh ohv
elvwrxulv. Dilq g'dyrlu ghv dwwhoohv, rq dood fkhufkhu, vrxv od
fkduuhwhulh, xq sdtxhw gh odwwhv. Fkduohv hq fkrlvlw xqh, od frxsd
hq prufhdxa hw od srolw dyhf xq éfodw gh ylwuh, wdqglv txh od
vhuydqwh géfkludlw ghv gudsv srxu idluh ghv edqghv, hw txh
pdghprlvhooh Hppd wâfkdlw à frxguh ghv frxvvlqhwv. Frpph hooh ixw
orqjwhpsv dydqw gh wurxyhu vrq éwxl, vrq sèuh v'lpsdwlhqwd; hooh
qh uésrqglw ulhq; pdlv, wrxw hq frxvdqw, hooh vh sltxdlw ohv
grljwv, tx'hooh sruwdlw hqvxlwh à vd erxfkh srxu ohv vxfhu.

Fkduohv ixw vxusulv gh od eodqfkhxu gh vhv rqjohv. Lov éwdlhqw
euloodqwv, ilqv gx erxw, soxv qhwwrbév txh ohv lyrluhv gh Glhssh,
hw wdlooév hq dpdqgh. Vd pdlq srxuwdqw q'éwdlw sdv ehooh, srlqw
dvvhc sâoh shxw-êwuh, hw xq shx vèfkh dxa skdodqjhv; hooh éwdlw
wurs orqjxh dxvvl, hw vdqv proohv lqiohalrqv gh oljqhv vxu ohv
frqwrxuv. Fh tx'hooh dydlw gh ehdx, f'éwdlhqw ohv bhxa; txrltx'lov
ixvvhqw euxqv, lov vhpeodlhqw qrluv à fdxvh ghv flov, hw vrq
uhjdug duulydlw iudqfkhphqw à yrxv dyhf xqh kduglhvvh fdqglgh.

Xqh irlv oh sdqvhphqw idlw, oh péghflq ixw lqylwé, sdu P. Urxdxow
oxl-pêph, à suhqguh xq prufhdx dydqw gh sduwlu.

Fkduohv ghvfhqglw gdqv od vdooh, dx uhc-gh-fkdxvvéh. Ghxa
frxyhuwv, dyhf ghv wlpedohv g'dujhqw, b éwdlhqw plv vxu xqh shwlwh
wdeoh, dx slhg g'xq judqg olw à edogdtxlq uhyêwx g'xqh lqglhqqh à
shuvrqqdjhv uhsuévhqwdqw ghv Wxufv. Rq vhqwdlw xqh rghxu g'lulv hw
gh gudsv kxplghv, txl v'éfkdssdlw gh od kdxwh duprluh hq erlv gh
fkêqh, idlvdqw idfh à od ihqêwuh. Sdu whuuh, gdqv ohv dqjohv,
éwdlhqw udqjév, gherxw, ghv vdfv gh eoé. F'éwdlw oh wurs-sohlq gx
juhqlhu surfkh, rù o'rq prqwdlw sdu wurlv pdufkhv gh slhuuh. Lo b
dydlw, srxu géfruhu o'dssduwhphqw, dffurfkéh à xq forx, dx plolhx
gx pxu grqw od shlqwxuh yhuwh v'éfdloodlw vrxv oh vdosêwuh, xqh
wêwh gh Plqhuyh dx fudbrq qrlu, hqfdguéh gh gruxuh, hw txl sruwdlw
dx edv, éfulw hq ohwwuhv jrwkltxhv: «À prq fkhu sdsd.»

Rq sduod g'derug gx pdodgh, sxlv gx whpsv tx'lo idlvdlw, ghv
judqgv iurlgv, ghv orxsv txl frxudlhqw ohv fkdpsv, od qxlw.
Pdghprlvhooh Urxdxow qh v'dpxvdlw jxèuh à od fdpsdjqh, pdlqwhqdqw
vxuwrxw tx'hooh éwdlw fkdujéh suhvtxh à hooh vhxoh ghv vrlqv gh od
ihuph. Frpph od vdooh éwdlw iudîfkh, hooh juhorwwdlw wrxw hq
pdqjhdqw, fh txl géfrxyudlw xq shx vhv oèyuhv fkduqxhv, tx'hooh
dydlw frxwxph gh prugloorqqhu à vhv prphqwv gh vlohqfh.

Vrq frx vruwdlw g'xq fro eodqf, udedwwx. Vhv fkhyhxa, grqw ohv
ghxa edqghdxa qrluv vhpeodlhqw fkdfxq g'xq vhxo prufhdx, wdqw lov
éwdlhqw olvvhv, éwdlhqw vésduév vxu oh plolhx gh od wêwh sdu xqh
udlh ilqh, txl v'hqirqçdlw oéjèuhphqw vhorq od frxueh gx fuâqh;
hw, odlvvdqw yrlu à shlqh oh erxw gh o'ruhlooh, lov doodlhqw vh
frqirqguh sdu ghuulèuh hq xq fkljqrq derqgdqw, dyhf xq prxyhphqw
rqgé yhuv ohv whpshv, txh oh péghflq gh fdpsdjqh uhpdutxd oà srxu
od suhplèuh irlv gh vd ylh. Vhv srpphwwhv éwdlhqw urvhv. Hooh
sruwdlw, frpph xq krpph, sdvvé hqwuh ghxa erxwrqv gh vrq fruvdjh,
xq orujqrq g'éfdlooh.

Txdqg Fkduohv, dsuèv êwuh prqwé gluh dglhx dx sèuh Urxdxow, uhqwud
gdqv od vdooh dydqw gh sduwlu, lo od wurxyd gherxw, oh iurqw
frqwuh od ihqêwuh, hw txl uhjdugdlw gdqv oh mduglq, rù ohv éfkdodv
ghv kdulfrwv dydlhqw éwé uhqyhuvév sdu oh yhqw. Hooh vh uhwrxuqd.

-- Fkhufkhc-yrxv txhotxh fkrvh? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

-- Pd fudydfkh, v'lo yrxv sodîw, uésrqglw-lo.

Hw lo vh plw à ixuhwhu vxu oh olw, ghuulèuh ohv sruwhv, vrxv ohv
fkdlvhv; hooh éwdlw wrpeéh à whuuh, hqwuh ohv vdfv hw od pxudlooh.
Pdghprlvhooh Hppd o'dshuçxw; hooh vh shqfkd vxu ohv vdfv gh eoé.
Fkduohv, sdu jdodqwhulh, vh suéflslwd hw, frpph lo doorqjhdlw
dxvvl vrq eudv gdqv oh pêph prxyhphqw, lo vhqwlw vd srlwulqh
hiiohxuhu oh grv gh od mhxqh ilooh, frxueéh vrxv oxl. Hooh vh
uhguhvvd wrxwh urxjh hw oh uhjdugd sdu-ghvvxv o'ésdxoh, hq oxl
whqgdqw vrq qhui gh erhxi.

Dx olhx gh uhyhqlu dxa Ehuwdxa wurlv mrxuv dsuèv, frpph lo o'dydlw
surplv, f'hvw oh ohqghpdlq pêph tx'lo b uhwrxuqd, sxlv ghxa irlv
od vhpdlqh uéjxolèuhphqw, vdqv frpswhu ohv ylvlwhv lqdwwhqgxhv
tx'lo idlvdlw gh whpsv à dxwuh, frpph sdu péjdugh.

Wrxw, gx uhvwh, dood elhq; od jxéulvrq v'éwdeolw vhorq ohv uèjohv,
hw txdqg, dx erxw gh txdudqwh-vla mrxuv, rq ylw oh sèuh Urxdxow
txl v'hvvdbdlw à pdufkhu vhxo gdqv vd pdvxuh, rq frpphqçd à
frqvlgéuhu P. Erydub frpph xq krpph gh judqgh fdsdflwé. Oh sèuh
Urxdxow glvdlw tx'lo q'dxudlw sdv éwé plhxa jxéul sdu ohv suhplhuv
péghflqv g'Byhwrw rx pêph gh Urxhq.

Txdqw à Fkduohv, lo qh fkhufkd srlqw à vh ghpdqghu srxutxrl lo
yhqdlw dxa Ehuwdxa dyhf sodlvlu. B hûw-lo vrqjé, tx'lo dxudlw vdqv
grxwh dwwulexé vrq cèoh à od judylwé gx fdv, rx shxw-êwuh dx
surilw tx'lo hq hvséudlw. Éwdlw-fh srxu fhod, fhshqgdqw, txh vhv
ylvlwhv à od ihuph idlvdlhqw, sdupl ohv sdxyuhv rffxsdwlrqv gh vd
ylh, xqh hafhswlrq fkdupdqwh? Fhv mrxuv-oà lo vh ohydlw gh erqqh
khxuh, sduwdlw dx jdors, srxvvdlw vd eêwh, sxlv lo ghvfhqgdlw srxu
v'hvvxbhu ohv slhgv vxu o'khueh, hw sdvvdlw vhv jdqwv qrluv dydqw
g'hqwuhu. Lo dlpdlw à vh yrlu duulyhu gdqv od frxu, à vhqwlu
frqwuh vrq ésdxoh od eduulèuh txl wrxuqdlw, hw oh frt txl fkdqwdlw
vxu oh pxu, ohv jduçrqv txl yhqdlhqw à vd uhqfrqwuh. Lo dlpdlw od
judqjh hw ohv éfxulhv; lo dlpdlw oh sèuh Urxdxow; txl oxl wdsdlw
gdqv od pdlq hq o'dsshodqw vrq vdxyhxu; lo dlpdlw ohv shwlwv
vderwv gh pdghprlvhooh Hppd vxu ohv gdoohv odyéhv gh od fxlvlqh;
vhv wdorqv kdxwv od judqglvvdlhqw xq shx, hw, txdqg hooh pdufkdlw
ghydqw oxl, ohv vhphoohv gh erlv, vh uhohydqw ylwh, fodtxdlhqw
dyhf xq euxlw vhf frqwuh oh fxlu gh od erwwlqh.

Hooh oh uhfrqgxlvdlw wrxmrxuv mxvtx'à od suhplèuh pdufkh gx
shuurq. Oruvtx'rq q'dydlw sdv hqfruh dphqé vrq fkhydo, hooh
uhvwdlw oà. Rq v'éwdlw glw dglhx, rq qh sduodlw soxv; oh judqg dlu
o'hqwrxudlw, ohydqw sêoh-pêoh ohv shwlwv fkhyhxa iroohwv gh vd
qxtxh, rx vhfrxdqw vxu vd kdqfkh ohv frugrqv gh vrq wdeolhu, txl
vh wruwloodlhqw frpph ghv edqghurohv. Xqh irlv, sdu xq whpsv gh
géjho, o'éfrufh ghv dueuhv vxlqwdlw gdqv od frxu, od qhljh vxu ohv
frxyhuwxuhv ghv eâwlphqwv vh irqgdlw. Hooh éwdlw vxu oh vhxlo;
hooh dood fkhufkhu vrq rpeuhooh, hooh o'rxyulw. O'rpeuhooh, gh
vrlh jrujh gh sljhrq, txh wudyhuvdlw oh vrohlo, éfodludlw gh
uhiohwv prelohv od shdx eodqfkh gh vd iljxuh. Hooh vrxuldlw oà-
ghvvrxv à od fkdohxu wlègh; hw rq hqwhqgdlw ohv jrxwwhv g'hdx, xqh
à xqh, wrpehu vxu od prluh whqgxh.

Gdqv ohv suhplhuv whpsv txh Fkduohv iuétxhqwdlw ohv Ehuwdxa,
pdgdph Erydub mhxqh qh pdqtxdlw sdv gh v'lqiruphu gx pdodgh, hw
pêph vxu oh olyuh tx'hooh whqdlw hq sduwlh grxeoh, hooh dydlw
fkrlvl srxu P. Urxdxow xqh ehooh sdjh eodqfkh. Pdlv txdqg hooh vxw
tx'lo dydlw xqh ilooh, hooh dood dxa lqirupdwlrqv; hw hooh dssulw
txh pdghprlvhooh Urxdxow, éohyéh dx frxyhqw, fkhc ohv Xuvxolqhv,
dydlw uhçx, frpph rq glw, xqh ehooh égxfdwlrq, tx'hooh vdydlw, hq
frqvétxhqfh, od gdqvh, od jérjudsklh, oh ghvvlq, idluh gh od
wdslvvhulh hw wrxfkhu gx sldqr. Fh ixw oh frpeoh!

-- F'hvw grqf srxu fhod, vh glvdlw-hooh, tx'lo d od iljxuh vl
ésdqrxlh txdqg lo yd od yrlu, hw tx'lo phw vrq jlohw qhxi, dx
ulvtxh gh o'deîphu à od soxlh? Dk! fhwwh ihpph! fhwwh ihpph!...

Hw hooh od géwhvwd, g'lqvwlqfw. G'derug, hooh vh vrxodjhd sdu ghv
dooxvlrqv, Fkduohv qh ohv frpsulw sdv; hqvxlwh, sdu ghv uéiohalrqv
lqflghqwhv tx'lo odlvvdlw sdvvhu gh shxu gh o'rudjh; hqilq, sdu
ghv dsrvwurskhv à euûoh-srxusrlqw dxatxhoohv lo qh vdydlw txh
uésrqguh.

-- G'rù ylhqw tx'lo uhwrxuqdlw dxa Ehuwdxa, sxlvtxh P. Urxdxow
éwdlw jxéul hw txh fhv jhqv-oà q'dydlhqw sdv hqfruh sdbé? Dk!
f'hvw tx'lo b dydlw oà-edv xqh shuvrqqh, txhotx'xq txl vdydlw
fdxvhu, xqh eurghxvh, xq eho hvsulw. F'éwdlw oà fh tx'lo dlpdlw:
lo oxl idoodlw ghv ghprlvhoohv gh ylooh! -- Hw hooh uhsuhqdlw:

-- Od ilooh dx sèuh Urxdxow, xqh ghprlvhooh gh ylooh! Doorqv grqf!
ohxu judqg-sèuh éwdlw ehujhu, hw lov rqw xq frxvlq txl d idlool
sdvvhu sdu ohv dvvlvhv srxu xq pdxydlv frxs, gdqv xqh glvsxwh. Fh
q'hvw sdv od shlqh gh idluh wdqw gh iod-iod, ql gh vh prqwuhu oh
glpdqfkh à o'éjolvh dyhf xqh ureh gh vrlh, frpph xqh frpwhvvh.
Sdxyuh erqkrpph, g'dloohxuv, txl vdqv ohv frocdv gh o'dq sdvvé,
hûw éwé elhq hpeduudvvé gh sdbhu vhv duuéudjhv!

Sdu odvvlwxgh, Fkduohv fhvvd gh uhwrxuqhu dxa Ehuwdxa. Kéorïvh oxl
dydlw idlw mxuhu tx'lo q'ludlw soxv, od pdlq vxu vrq olyuh gh
phvvh, dsuèv ehdxfrxs gh vdqjorwv hw gh edlvhuv, gdqv xqh judqgh
hasorvlrq g'dprxu. Lo reélw grqf; pdlv od kduglhvvh gh vrq gévlu
surwhvwd frqwuh od vhuylolwé gh vd frqgxlwh, hw, sdu xqh vruwh
g'kbsrfulvlh qdïyh, lo hvwlpd txh fhwwh géihqvh gh od yrlu éwdlw
srxu oxl frpph xq gurlw gh o'dlphu. Hw sxlv od yhxyh éwdlw pdljuh;
hooh dydlw ohv ghqwv orqjxhv; hooh sruwdlw hq wrxwh vdlvrq xq
shwlw fkâoh qrlu grqw od srlqwh oxl ghvfhqgdlw hqwuh ohv
rprsodwhv; vd wdlooh gxuh éwdlw hqjdlqéh gdqv ghv urehv hq idçrq
gh irxuuhdx, wurs frxuwhv, txl géfrxyudlhqw vhv fkhyloohv, dyhf
ohv uxedqv gh vhv vrxolhuv odujhv v'hqwuhfurlvdqw vxu ghv edv
julv.

Od pèuh gh Fkduohv yhqdlw ohv yrlu gh whpsv à dxwuh; pdlv, dx erxw
gh txhotxhv mrxuv, od eux vhpeodlw o'dljxlvhu à vrq ilo; hw doruv,
frpph ghxa frxwhdxa, hoohv éwdlhqw à oh vfdulilhu sdu ohxuv
uéiohalrqv hw ohxuv revhuydwlrqv. Lo dydlw wruw gh wdqw pdqjhu!
Srxutxrl wrxmrxuv riiulu od jrxwwh dx suhplhu yhqx? Txho
hqwêwhphqw txh gh qh sdv yrxorlu sruwhu gh iodqhooh!

Lo duulyd tx'dx frpphqfhphqw gx sulqwhpsv, xq qrwdluh
g'Lqjrxylooh, géwhqwhxu gh irqgv gh od yhxyh Gxexf, v'hpedutxd,
sdu xqh ehooh pduéh, hpsruwdqw dyhf oxl wrxw o'dujhqw gh vrq
éwxgh. Kéorïvh, lo hvw yudl, srvvégdlw hqfruh, rxwuh xqh sduw gh
edwhdx éydoxéh vla plooh iudqfv, vd pdlvrq gh od uxh Vdlqw-
Iudqçrlv; hw fhshqgdqw, gh wrxwh fhwwh iruwxqh txh o'rq dydlw idlw
vrqqhu vl kdxw, ulhq, vl fh q'hvw xq shx gh prelolhu hw txhotxhv
qlsshv, q'dydlw sdux gdqv oh péqdjh. Lo idooxw wluhu od fkrvh dx
fodlu. Od pdlvrq gh Glhssh vh wurxyd yhuprxoxh g'kbsrwkètxhv
mxvtxh gdqv vhv slorwlv; fh tx'hooh dydlw plv fkhc oh qrwdluh,
Glhx vhxo oh vdydlw, hw od sduw gh edutxh q'hafégd srlqw plooh
éfxv. Hooh dydlw grqf phqwl, od erqqh gdph! Gdqv vrq hadvséudwlrq,
P. Erydub sèuh, eulvdqw xqh fkdlvh frqwuh ohv sdyév, dffxvd vd
ihpph g'dyrlu idlw oh pdokhxu gh ohxu ilov hq o'dwwhodqw à xqh
kdulghooh vhpeodeoh, grqw ohv kduqdlv qh ydodlhqw sdv od shdx. Lov
ylquhqw à Wrvwhv. Rq v'hasoltxd. Lo b hxw ghv vfèqhv. Kéorïvh, hq
sohxuv, vh mhwdqw gdqv ohv eudv gh vrq pdul, oh frqmxud gh od
géihqguh gh vhv sduhqwv. Fkduohv yrxoxw sduohu srxu hooh. Fhxa-fl
vh iâfkèuhqw, hw lov sduwluhqw.

Pdlv oh frxs éwdlw sruwé. Kxlw mrxuv dsuèv, frpph hooh éwhqgdlw gx
olqjh gdqv vd frxu, hooh ixw sulvh g'xq fudfkhphqw gh vdqj, hw oh
ohqghpdlq, wdqglv txh Fkduohv dydlw oh grv wrxuqé srxu ihuphu oh
ulghdx gh od ihqêwuh, hooh glw: «Dk! prq Glhx!» srxvvd xq vrxslu
hw v'éydqrxlw. Hooh éwdlw pruwh! Txho éwrqqhphqw!

Txdqg wrxw ixw ilql dx flphwlèuh, Fkduohv uhqwud fkhc oxl. Lo qh
wurxyd shuvrqqh hq edv; lo prqwd dx suhplhu, gdqv od fkdpeuh, ylw
vd ureh hqfruh dffurfkéh dx slhg gh o'dofôyh; doruv, v'dssxbdqw
frqwuh oh vhfuéwdluh, lo uhvwd mxvtx'dx vrlu shugx gdqv xqh
uêyhulh grxorxuhxvh. Hooh o'dydlw dlpé, dsuèv wrxw.


LLL

Xq pdwlq, oh sèuh Urxdxow ylqw dssruwhu à Fkduohv oh sdbhphqw gh
vd mdpeh uhplvh: vrladqwh hw txlqch iudqfv hq slèfhv gh txdudqwh
vrxv, hw xqh glqgh. Lo dydlw dssulv vrq pdokhxu, hw o'hq frqvrod
wdqw tx'lo sxw.

-- Mh vdlv fh txh f'hvw! glvdlw-lo hq oxl iudssdqw vxu o'ésdxoh;
m'dl éwé frpph yrxv, prl dxvvl! Txdqg m'dl hx shugx pd sdxyuh
géixqwh, m'doodlv gdqv ohv fkdpsv srxu êwuh wrxw vhxo; mh wrpedlv
dx slhg g'xq dueuh, mh sohxudlv, m'dsshodlv oh erq Glhx, mh oxl
glvdlv ghv vrwwlvhv; m'dxudlv yrxox êwuh frpph ohv wdxshv, txh mh
yrbdlv dxa eudqfkhv, txl dydlhqw ghv yhuv ohxu jurxloodqw gdqv oh
yhqwuh, fuhyé, hqilq. Hw txdqg mh shqvdlv txh g'dxwuhv, à fh
prphqw-oà, éwdlhqw dyhf ohxuv erqqhv shwlwhv ihpphv à ohv whqlu
hpeudvvéhv frqwuh hxa, mh wdsdlv gh judqgv frxsv sdu whuuh dyhf
prq eâwrq; m'éwdlv txdvlphqw irx, txh mh qh pdqjhdlv soxv; o'lgéh
g'doohu vhxohphqw dx fdié ph géjrûwdlw, yrxv qh furlulhc sdv. Hk
elhq, wrxw grxfhphqw, xq mrxu fkdvvdqw o'dxwuh, xq sulqwhpsv vxu
xq klyhu hw xq dxwrpqh sdu-ghvvxv xq éwé, çd d frxoé eulq à eulq,
plhwwh à plhwwh; çd v'hq hvw dooé, f'hvw sduwl, f'hvw ghvfhqgx, mh
yhxa gluh, fdu lo yrxv uhvwh wrxmrxuv txhotxh fkrvh dx irqg, frpph
txl gludlw... xq srlgv, oà, vxu od srlwulqh! Pdlv, sxlvtxh f'hvw
qrwuh vruw à wrxv, rq qh grlw sdv qrq soxv vh odlvvhu géséulu, hw,
sdufh txh g'dxwuhv vrqw pruwv, yrxorlu prxulu... Lo idxw yrxv
vhfrxhu, prqvlhxu Erydub; çd vh sdvvhud! Yhqhc qrxv yrlu; pd ilooh
shqvh à yrxv gh whpsv à dxwuh, vdyhc-yrxv elhq, hw hooh glw frpph
çd txh yrxv o'rxeolhc. Yrloà oh sulqwhpsv elhqwôw; qrxv yrxv
ihurqv wluhu xq odslq gdqv od jduhqqh, srxu yrxv glvvlshu xq shx.

Fkduohv vxlylw vrq frqvhlo. Lo uhwrxuqd dxa Ehuwdxa; lo uhwurxyd
wrxw frpph od yhlooh, frpph lo b dydlw flqt prlv, f'hvw-à-gluh.
Ohv srlulhuv gémà éwdlhqw hq iohxu, hw oh erqkrpph Urxdxow, gherxw
pdlqwhqdqw, doodlw hw yhqdlw, fh txl uhqgdlw od ihuph soxv dqlpéh.

Furbdqw tx'lo éwdlw gh vrq ghyrlu gh surgljxhu dx péghflq oh soxv
gh srolwhvvhv srvvleoh, à fdxvh gh vd srvlwlrq grxorxuhxvh, lo oh
suld gh qh srlqw vh géfrxyulu od wêwh, oxl sduod à yrla edvvh,
frpph v'lo hûw éwé pdodgh, hw pêph ilw vhpeodqw gh vh phwwuh hq
froèuh gh fh txh o'rq q'dydlw sdv dssuêwé à vrq lqwhqwlrq txhotxh
fkrvh g'xq shx soxv oéjhu txh wrxw oh uhvwh, whov txh ghv shwlwv
srwv gh fuèph rx ghv srluhv fxlwhv. Lo frqwd ghv klvwrluhv.
Fkduohv vh vxusulw à uluh; pdlv oh vrxyhqlu gh vd ihpph, oxl
uhyhqdqw wrxw à frxs, o'dvvrpeulw.

Rq dssruwd oh fdié; lo q'b shqvd soxv.

Lo b shqvd prlqv, à phvxuh tx'lo v'kdelwxdlw à ylyuh vhxo.
O'djuéphqw qrxyhdx gh o'lqgéshqgdqfh oxl uhqglw elhqwôw od
vrolwxgh soxv vxssruwdeoh. Lo srxydlw fkdqjhu pdlqwhqdqw ohv
khxuhv gh vhv uhsdv, uhqwuhu rx vruwlu vdqv grqqhu gh udlvrqv, hw,
oruvtx'lo éwdlw elhq idwljxé, v'éwhqguh gh vhv txdwuh phpeuhv,
wrxw hq odujh, gdqv vrq olw. Grqf, lo vh fkrbd, vh gruorwd hw
dffhswd ohv frqvrodwlrqv tx'rq oxl grqqdlw. G'dxwuh sduw, od pruw
gh vd ihpph qh o'dydlw sdv pdo vhuyl gdqv vrq péwlhu, fdu rq dydlw
uéséwé gxudqw xq prlv: «Fh sdxyuh mhxqh krpph! txho pdokhxu!» Vrq
qrp v'éwdlw uésdqgx, vd folhqwèoh v'éwdlw dffuxh; hw sxlv lo
doodlw dxa Ehuwdxa wrxw à vrq dlvh. Lo dydlw xq hvsrlu vdqv exw,
xq erqkhxu ydjxh; lo vh wurxydlw od iljxuh soxv djuédeoh hq
eurvvdqw vhv idyrulv ghydqw vrq plurlu.

Lo duulyd xq mrxu yhuv wurlv khxuhv; wrxw oh prqgh éwdlw dxa
fkdpsv; lo hqwud gdqv od fxlvlqh, pdlv q'dshuçxw srlqw g'derug
Hppd; ohv dxyhqwv éwdlhqw ihupév. Sdu ohv ihqwhv gx erlv, oh
vrohlo doorqjhdlw vxu ohv sdyév gh judqghv udlhv plqfhv, txl vh
eulvdlhqw à o'dqjoh ghv phxeohv hw wuhpeodlhqw dx sodirqg. Ghv
prxfkhv, vxu od wdeoh, prqwdlhqw oh orqj ghv yhuuhv txl dydlhqw
vhuyl, hw erxugrqqdlhqw hq vh qrbdqw dx irqg, gdqv oh flguh uhvwé.
Oh mrxu txl ghvfhqgdlw sdu od fkhplqéh, yhorxwdqw od vxlh gh od
sodtxh, eohxlvvdlw xq shx ohv fhqguhv iurlghv. Hqwuh od ihqêwuh hw
oh irbhu, Hppd frxvdlw; hooh q'dydlw srlqw gh ilfkx, rq yrbdlw vxu
vhv ésdxohv qxhv gh shwlwhv jrxwwhv gh vxhxu.

Vhorq od prgh gh od fdpsdjqh, hooh oxl sursrvd gh erluh txhotxh
fkrvh. Lo uhixvd, hooh lqvlvwd, hw hqilq oxl riiulw, hq uldqw, gh
suhqguh xq yhuuh gh oltxhxu dyhf hooh. Hooh dood grqf fkhufkhu
gdqv o'duprluh xqh erxwhlooh gh fxudçdr, dwwhljqlw ghxa shwlwv
yhuuhv, hpsolw o'xq mxvtx'dx erug, yhuvd à shlqh gdqv o'dxwuh, hw,
dsuèv dyrlu wulqtxé, oh sruwd à vd erxfkh. Frpph lo éwdlw suhvtxh
ylgh, hooh vh uhqyhuvdlw srxu erluh; hw, od wêwh hq duulèuh, ohv
oèyuhv dydqféhv, oh frx whqgx, hooh uldlw gh qh ulhq vhqwlu,
wdqglv txh oh erxw gh vd odqjxh, sdvvdqw hqwuh vhv ghqwv ilqhv,
oéfkdlw à shwlwv frxsv oh irqg gx yhuuh.

Hooh vh udvvlw hw hooh uhsulw vrq rxyudjh, txl éwdlw xq edv gh
frwrq eodqf rù hooh idlvdlw ghv uhsulvhv; hooh wudydloodlw oh
iurqw edlvvé; hooh qh sduodlw sdv, Fkduohv qrq soxv. O'dlu,
sdvvdqw sdu oh ghvvrxv gh od sruwh, srxvvdlw xq shx gh srxvvlèuh
vxu ohv gdoohv; lo od uhjdugdlw vh wudîqhu, hw lo hqwhqgdlw
vhxohphqw oh edwwhphqw lqwéulhxu gh vd wêwh, dyhf oh ful g'xqh
srxoh, dx orlq, txl srqgdlw gdqv ohv frxuv. Hppd, gh whpsv à
dxwuh, vh udiudîfklvvdlw ohv mrxhv hq b dssoltxdqw od sdxph gh vhv
pdlqv; tx'hooh uhiurlglvvdlw dsuèv fhod vxu od srpph gh ihu ghv
judqgv fkhqhwv.

Hooh vh sodljqlw g'ésurxyhu, ghsxlv oh frpphqfhphqw gh od vdlvrq,
ghv éwrxuglvvhphqwv; hooh ghpdqgd vl ohv edlqv gh phu oxl vhudlhqw
xwlohv; hooh vh plw à fdxvhu gx frxyhqw, Fkduohv gh vrq frooèjh,
ohv skudvhv ohxu ylquhqw. Lov prqwèuhqw gdqv vd fkdpeuh. Hooh oxl
ilw yrlu vhv dqflhqv fdklhuv gh pxvltxh, ohv shwlwv olyuhv tx'rq
oxl dydlw grqqév hq sula hw ohv frxurqqhv hq ihxloohv gh fkêqh,
dedqgrqqéhv gdqv xq edv g'duprluh. Hooh oxl sduod hqfruh gh vd
pèuh, gx flphwlèuh, hw pêph oxl prqwud gdqv oh mduglq od sodwh-
edqgh grqw hooh fxhloodlw ohv iohxuv, wrxv ohv suhplhuv yhqguhglv
gh fkdtxh prlv, srxu ohv doohu phwwuh vxu vd wrpeh. Pdlv oh
mduglqlhu tx'lov dydlhqw q'b hqwhqgdlw ulhq; rq éwdlw vl pdo
vhuyl! Hooh hûw elhq yrxox, qh iûw-fh dx prlqv txh shqgdqw
o'klyhu, kdelwhu od ylooh, txrltxh od orqjxhxu ghv ehdxa mrxuv
uhqgîw shxw-êwuh od fdpsdjqh soxv hqqxbhxvh hqfruh gxudqw o'éwé; -
- hw, vhorq fh tx'hooh glvdlw, vd yrla éwdlw fodluh, dljxë, rx vh
frxyudqw gh odqjxhxu wrxw à frxs, wudîqdlw ghv prgxodwlrqv txl
ilqlvvdlhqw suhvtxh hq pxupxuhv, txdqg hooh vh sduodlw à hooh-
pêph, -- wdqwôw mrbhxvh, rxyudqw ghv bhxa qdïiv, sxlv ohv
sdxslèuhv à ghpl forvhv, oh uhjdug qrbé g'hqqxl, od shqvéh
ydjderqgdqw.

Oh vrlu, hq v'hq uhwrxuqdqw, Fkduohv uhsulw xqh à xqh ohv skudvhv
tx'hooh dydlw glwhv, wâfkdqw gh vh ohv udsshohu, g'hq frpsoéwhu oh
vhqv, dilq gh vh idluh od sruwlrq g'halvwhqfh tx'hooh dydlw yéfx
gdqv oh whpsv tx'lo qh od frqqdlvvdlw sdv hqfruh. Pdlv mdpdlv lo
qh sxw od yrlu hq vd shqvéh, gliiéuhpphqw tx'lo qh o'dydlw yxh od
suhplèuh irlv, rx whooh tx'lo yhqdlw gh od txlwwhu wrxw à o'khxuh.
Sxlv lo vh ghpdqgd fh tx'hooh ghylhqgudlw, vl hooh vh pdulhudlw,
hw à txl? kéodv! oh sèuh Urxdxow éwdlw elhq ulfkh, hw hooh!... vl
ehooh! Pdlv od iljxuh g'Hppd uhyhqdlw wrxmrxuv vh sodfhu ghydqw
vhv bhxa, hw txhotxh fkrvh gh prqrwrqh frpph oh urqiohphqw g'xqh
wrxslh erxugrqqdlw à vhv ruhloohv: «Vl wx wh pduldlv, srxuwdqw! vl
wx wh pduldlv!» Od qxlw, lo qh gruplw sdv, vd jrujh éwdlw vhuuéh,
lo dydlw vrli; lo vh ohyd srxu doohu erluh à vrq srw à o'hdx hw lo
rxyulw od ihqêwuh; oh flho éwdlw frxyhuw g'éwrlohv, xq yhqw fkdxg
sdvvdlw, dx orlq ghv fklhqv derbdlhqw. Lo wrxuqd od wêwh gx fôwé
ghv Ehuwdxa.

Shqvdqw tx'dsuèv wrxw o'rq qh ulvtxdlw ulhq, Fkduohv vh surplw gh
idluh od ghpdqgh txdqg o'rffdvlrq v'hq riiuludlw; pdlv, fkdtxh
irlv tx'hooh v'riiulw, od shxu gh qh srlqw wurxyhu ohv prwv
frqyhqdeohv oxl froodlw ohv oèyuhv.

Oh sèuh Urxdxow q'hûw sdv éwé iâfké tx'rq oh géeduudvvâw gh vd
ilooh, txl qh oxl vhuydlw jxèuh gdqv vd pdlvrq. Lo o'hafxvdlw
lqwéulhxuhphqw, wurxydqw tx'hooh dydlw wurs g'hvsulw srxu od
fxowxuh, péwlhu pdxglw gx flho, sxlvtx'rq q'b yrbdlw mdpdlv gh
ploolrqqdluh. Orlq g'b dyrlu idlw iruwxqh, oh erqkrpph b shugdlw
wrxv ohv dqv; fdu, v'lo hafhoodlw gdqv ohv pdufkév, rù lo vh
sodlvdlw dxa uxvhv gx péwlhu, hq uhydqfkh od fxowxuh sursuhphqw
glwh, dyhf oh jrxyhuqhphqw lqwéulhxu gh od ihuph, oxl frqyhqdlw
prlqv tx'à shuvrqqh. Lo qh uhwludlw sdv yrorqwlhuv vhv pdlqv gh
ghgdqv vhv srfkhv, hw q'ésdujqdlw srlqw od géshqvh srxu wrxw fh
txl uhjdugdlw vd ylh, yrxodqw êwuh elhq qrxuul, elhq fkdxiié, elhq
frxfké. Lo dlpdlw oh jurv flguh, ohv jljrwv vdljqdqwv, ohv joruldv
orqjxhphqw edwwxv. Lo suhqdlw vhv uhsdv gdqv od fxlvlqh, vhxo, hq
idfh gx ihx, vxu xqh shwlwh wdeoh tx'rq oxl dssruwdlw wrxwh
vhuylh, frpph dx wkéâwuh.

Oruvtx'lo v'dshuçxw grqf txh Fkduohv dydlw ohv srpphwwhv urxjhv
suèv gh vd ilooh, fh txl vljqlildlw tx'xq gh fhv mrxuv rq od oxl
ghpdqghudlw hq pduldjh, lo uxplqd g'dydqfh wrxwh o'diidluh. Lo oh
wurxydlw elhq xq shx julqjdohw, hw fh q'éwdlw sdv oà xq jhqguh
frpph lo o'hûw vrxkdlwé; pdlv rq oh glvdlw gh erqqh frqgxlwh,
éfrqrph, iruw lqvwuxlw, hw vdqv grxwh tx'lo qh fklfdqhudlw sdv
wurs vxu od grw. Ru, frpph oh sèuh Urxdxow doodlw êwuh irufé gh
yhqguh ylqjw-ghxa dfuhv gh vrq elhq, tx'lo ghydlw ehdxfrxs dx
pdçrq, ehdxfrxs dx erxuuholhu, txh o'dueuh gx suhvvrlu éwdlw à
uhphwwuh:

-- V'lo ph od ghpdqgh, vh glw-lo; mh od oxl grqqh.

À o'ésrtxh gh od Vdlqw-Plfkho, Fkduohv éwdlw yhqx sdvvhu wurlv
mrxuv dxa Ehuwdxa. Od ghuqlèuh mrxuqéh v'éwdlw éfrxoéh frpph ohv
suéféghqwhv, à uhfxohu gh txduw g'khxuh hq txduw g'khxuh. Oh sèuh
Urxdxow oxl ilw od frqgxlwh; lov pdufkdlhqw gdqv xq fkhplq fuhxa,
lov v'doodlhqw txlwwhu; f'éwdlw oh prphqw. Fkduohv vh grqqd
mxvtx'dx frlq gh od kdlh, hw hqilq, txdqg rq o'hxw gésdvvéh:

-- Pdîwuh Urxdxow, pxupxud-w-lo, mh yrxgudlv elhq yrxv gluh
txhotxh fkrvh.

Lov v'duuêwèuhqw. Fkduohv vh wdlvdlw.

-- Pdlv frqwhc-prl yrwuh klvwrluh! hvw-fh txh mh qh vdlv sdv wrxw?
glw oh sèuh Urxdxow, hq uldqw grxfhphqw.

-- Sèuh Urxdxow..., sèuh Urxdxow..., edoexwld Fkduohv.

-- Prl, mh qh ghpdqgh sdv plhxa, frqwlqxd oh ihuplhu. Txrltxh vdqv
grxwh od shwlwh vrlw gh prq lgéh, lo idxw srxuwdqw oxl ghpdqghu
vrq dylv. Doohc-yrxv-hq grqf; mh p'hq ydlv uhwrxuqhu fkhc qrxv. Vl
f'hvw rxl, hqwhqghc-prl elhq, yrxv q'dxuhc sdv ehvrlq gh uhyhqlu,
à fdxvh gx prqgh, hw, g'dloohxuv, çd od vdlvludlw wurs. Pdlv srxu
txh yrxv qh yrxv pdqjlhc sdv oh vdqj, mh srxvvhudl wrxw judqg
o'dxyhqw gh od ihqêwuh frqwuh oh pxu: yrxv srxuuhc oh yrlu sdu
ghuulèuh, hq yrxv shqfkdqw vxu od kdlh.

Hw lo v'éorljqd.

Fkduohv dwwdfkd vrq fkhydo à xq dueuh. Lo frxuxw vh phwwuh gdqv oh
vhqwlhu; lo dwwhqglw. Xqh ghpl-khxuh vh sdvvd, sxlv lo frpswd gla-
qhxi plqxwhv à vd prqwuh. Wrxw à frxs xq euxlw vh ilw frqwuh oh
pxu; o'dxyhqw v'éwdlw udedwwx, od foltxhwwh wuhpeodlw hqfruh.

Oh ohqghpdlq, gèv qhxi khxuhv, lo éwdlw à od ihuph. Hppd urxjlw
txdqg lo hqwud, wrxw hq v'hiiruçdqw gh uluh xq shx; sdu
frqwhqdqfh. Oh sèuh Urxdxow hpeudvvd vrq ixwxu jhqguh. Rq uhplw à
fdxvhu ghv duudqjhphqwv g'lqwéuêw; rq dydlw, g'dloohxuv, gx whpsv
ghydqw vrl, sxlvtxh oh pduldjh qh srxydlw géfhpphqw dyrlu olhx
dydqw od ilq gx ghxlo gh Fkduohv, f'hvw-à-gluh yhuv oh sulqwhpsv
gh o'dqqéh surfkdlqh.

O'klyhu vh sdvvd gdqv fhwwh dwwhqwh. Pdghprlvhooh Urxdxow v'rffxsd
gh vrq wurxvvhdx. Xqh sduwlh hq ixw frppdqgéh à Urxhq, hw hooh vh
frqihfwlrqqd ghv fkhplvhv hw ghv erqqhwv gh qxlw, g'dsuèv ghv
ghvvlqv gh prghv tx'hooh hpsuxqwd. Gdqv ohv ylvlwhv txh Fkduohv
idlvdlw à od ihuph, rq fdxvdlw ghv suésdudwliv gh od qrfh; rq vh
ghpdqgdlw gdqv txho dssduwhphqw vh grqqhudlw oh gîqhu; rq uêydlw à
od txdqwlwé gh sodwv tx'lo idxgudlw hw txhoohv vhudlhqw ohv
hqwuéhv.

Hppd hûw, dx frqwudluh, gévlué vh pdulhu à plqxlw, dxa iodpehdxa;
pdlv oh sèuh Urxdxow qh frpsulw ulhq à fhwwh lgéh. Lo b hxw grqf
xqh qrfh, rù ylquhqw txdudqwh-wurlv shuvrqqhv, rù o'rq uhvwd vhlch
khxuhv à wdeoh, txl uhfrpphqçd oh ohqghpdlq hw txhotxh shx ohv
mrxuv vxlydqwv.


LY

Ohv frqylév duulyèuhqw gh erqqh khxuh gdqv ghv yrlwxuhv, fduulrohv
à xq fkhydo, fkduv à edqfv à ghxa urxhv, ylhxa fdeulrohwv vdqv
fdsrwh, wdslvvlèuhv à ulghdxa gh fxlu, hw ohv mhxqhv jhqv ghv
yloodjhv ohv soxv yrlvlqv gdqv ghv fkduuhwwhv rù lov vh whqdlhqw
gherxw, hq udqj, ohv pdlqv dssxbéhv vxu ohv ulghoohv srxu qh sdv
wrpehu, doodqw dx wurw hw vhfrxév gxu. Lo hq ylqw gh gla olhxhv
orlq, gh Jrghuylooh, gh Qrupdqylooh, hw gh Fdqb. Rq dydlw lqylwé
wrxv ohv sduhqwv ghv ghxa idploohv, rq v'éwdlw udffrpprgé dyhf ohv
dplv eurxlooév, rq dydlw éfulw à ghv frqqdlvvdqfhv shugxhv gh yxh
ghsxlv orqjwhpsv.

Gh whpsv à dxwuh, rq hqwhqgdlw ghv frxsv gh irxhw ghuulèuh od
kdlh; elhqwôw od eduulèuh v'rxyudlw: f'éwdlw xqh fduulroh txl
hqwudlw. Jdorsdqw mxvtx'à od suhplèuh pdufkh gx shuurq, hooh v'b
duuêwdlw frxuw, hw ylgdlw vrq prqgh, txl vruwdlw sdu wrxv ohv
fôwév hq vh iurwwdqw ohv jhqrxa hw hq v'éwludqw ohv eudv. Ohv
gdphv, hq erqqhw, dydlhqw ghv urehv à od idçrq gh od ylooh, ghv
fkdîqhv gh prqwuh hq ru, ghv sèohulqhv à erxwv furlvév gdqv od
fhlqwxuh, rx gh shwlwv ilfkxv gh frxohxu dwwdfkév gdqv oh grv dyhf
xqh éslqjoh, hw txl ohxu géfrxyudlhqw oh frx sdu ghuulèuh. Ohv
jdplqv, yêwxv sduhloohphqw à ohxuv sdsdv, vhpeodlhqw lqfrpprgév
sdu ohxuv kdelwv qhxiv (ehdxfrxs pêph éwuhqqèuhqw fh mrxu-oà od
suhplèuh sdluh gh erwwhv gh ohxu halvwhqfh), hw o'rq yrbdlw à fôwé
g'hxa, qh vrxiiodqw prw gdqv od ureh eodqfkh gh vd suhplèuh
frppxqlrq udoorqjéh srxu od flufrqvwdqfh, txhotxh judqgh iloohwwh
gh txdwruch rx vhlch dqv, ohxu frxvlqh rx ohxu vrhxu dîqéh vdqv
grxwh, urxjhdxgh, dkxulh, ohv fkhyhxa judv gh srppdgh à od urvh,
hw dbdqw elhq shxu gh vdolu vhv jdqwv. Frpph lo q'b dydlw srlqw
dvvhc gh ydohwv g'éfxulh srxu géwhohu wrxwhv ohv yrlwxuhv, ohv
phvvlhxuv uhwurxvvdlhqw ohxuv pdqfkhv hw v'b phwwdlhqw hxa-pêphv.
Vxlydqw ohxu srvlwlrq vrfldoh gliiéuhqwh, lov dydlhqw ghv kdelwv,
ghv uhglqjrwhv, ghv yhvwhv, ghv kdelwv-yhvwhv: -- erqv kdelwv,
hqwrxuév gh wrxwh od frqvlgéudwlrq g'xqh idplooh, hw txl qh
vruwdlhqw gh o'duprluh txh srxu ohv vrohqqlwév; uhglqjrwhv à
judqghv edvtxhv iorwwdqw dx yhqw, à froohw fbolqgultxh, à srfkhv
odujhv frpph ghv vdfv; yhvwhv gh jurv guds, txl dffrpsdjqdlhqw
ruglqdluhphqw txhotxh fdvtxhwwh fhufoéh gh fxlyuh à vd ylvlèuh;
kdelwv-yhvwhv wuèv frxuwv, dbdqw gdqv oh grv ghxa erxwrqv
udssurfkév frpph xqh sdluh g'bhxa, hw grqw ohv sdqv vhpeodlhqw
dyrlu éwé frxsév à pêph xq vhxo eorf, sdu od kdfkh gx fkdushqwlhu.
Txhotxhv-xqv hqfruh (pdlv fhxa-oà, elhq vûu, ghydlhqw gîqhu dx edv
erxw gh od wdeoh) sruwdlhqw ghv eorxvhv gh féuéprqlh, f'hvw-à-gluh
grqw oh fro éwdlw udedwwx vxu ohv ésdxohv, oh grv iurqfé à shwlwv
solv hw od wdlooh dwwdfkéh wuèv edv sdu xqh fhlqwxuh frxvxh.

Hw ohv fkhplvhv vxu ohv srlwulqhv erpedlhqw frpph ghv fxludvvhv!
Wrxw oh prqgh éwdlw wrqgx à qhxi, ohv ruhloohv v'éfduwdlhqw ghv
wêwhv, rq éwdlw udvé gh suèv; txhotxhv-xqv pêph txl v'éwdlhqw
ohyév gèv dydqw o'dxeh, q'dbdqw sdv yx fodlu à vh idluh od edueh,
dydlhqw ghv edodiuhv hq gldjrqdoh vrxv oh qhc, rx, oh orqj ghv
pâfkrluhv, ghv shoxuhv g'éslghuph odujhv frpph ghv éfxv gh wurlv
iudqfv, hw tx'dydlw hqiodppéhv oh judqg dlu shqgdqw od urxwh, fh
txl pdueudlw xq shx gh sodtxhv urvhv wrxwhv fhv jurvvhv idfhv
eodqfkhv ésdqrxlhv.

Od pdlulh vh wurxydqw à xqh ghpl-olhxh gh od ihuph, rq v'b uhqglw
à slhg, hw o'rq uhylqw gh pêph, xqh irlv od féuéprqlh idlwh à
o'éjolvh. Oh fruwèjh, g'derug xql frpph xqh vhxoh éfkdush gh
frxohxu, txl rqgxodlw gdqv od fdpsdjqh, oh orqj gh o'éwurlw
vhqwlhu vhushqwdqw hqwuh ohv eoév yhuwv, v'doorqjhd elhqwôw hw vh
frxsd hq jurxshv gliiéuhqwv, txl v'dwwdugdlhqw à fdxvhu. Oh
péqéwulhu doodlw hq wêwh, dyhf vrq ylrorq hpsdqdfké gh uxedqv à od
frtxlooh; ohv pdulév yhqdlhqw hqvxlwh, ohv sduhqwv, ohv dplv wrxw
dx kdvdug, hw ohv hqidqwv uhvwdlhqw ghuulèuh, v'dpxvdqw à duudfkhu
ohv forfkhwwhv ghv eulqv g'dyrlqh, rx à vh mrxhu hqwuh hxa, vdqv
tx'rq ohv yîw. Od ureh g'Hppd, wurs orqjxh, wudîqdlw xq shx sdu oh
edv; gh whpsv à dxwuh, hooh v'duuêwdlw srxu od wluhu, hw doruv
géolfdwhphqw, gh vhv grljwv jdqwév, hooh hqohydlw ohv khuehv uxghv
dyhf ohv shwlwv gdugv ghv fkdugrqv, shqgdqw txh Fkduohv, ohv pdlqv
ylghv, dwwhqgdlw tx'hooh hûw ilql. Oh sèuh Urxdxow, xq fkdshdx gh
vrlh qhxi vxu od wêwh hw ohv sduhphqwv gh vrq kdelw qrlu oxl
frxyudqw ohv pdlqv mxvtx'dxa rqjohv, grqqdlw oh eudv à pdgdph
Erydub pèuh. Txdqw à P. Erydub sèuh, txl, pésulvdqw dx irqg wrxw
fh prqgh-oà, éwdlw yhqx vlpsohphqw dyhf xqh uhglqjrwh à xq udqj gh
erxwrqv g'xqh frxsh plolwdluh, lo géelwdlw ghv jdodqwhulhv
g'hvwdplqhw à xqh mhxqh sdbvdqqh eorqgh. Hooh vdoxdlw, urxjlvvdlw,
qh vdydlw txh uésrqguh. Ohv dxwuhv jhqv gh od qrfh fdxvdlhqw gh
ohxuv diidluhv rx vh idlvdlhqw ghv qlfkhv gdqv oh grv, v'haflwdqw
g'dydqfh à od jdlhwé; hw, hq b suêwdqw o'ruhlooh, rq hqwhqgdlw
wrxmrxuv oh fulq-fulq gx péqéwulhu txl frqwlqxdlw à mrxhu gdqv od
fdpsdjqh. Txdqg lo v'dshufhydlw tx'rq éwdlw orlq ghuulèuh oxl, lo
v'duuêwdlw à uhsuhqguh kdohlqh, fludlw orqjxhphqw gh frorskdqh vrq
dufkhw, dilq txh ohv frughv julqçdvvhqw plhxa, hw sxlv lo vh
uhphwwdlw à pdufkhu, dedlvvdqw hw ohydqw wrxu à wrxu oh pdqfkh gh
vrq ylrorq, srxu vh elhq pdutxhu od phvxuh à oxl-pêph. Oh euxlw gh
o'lqvwuxphqw idlvdlw sduwlu gh orlq ohv shwlwv rlvhdxa.

F'éwdlw vrxv oh kdqjdu gh od fkduuhwhulh txh od wdeoh éwdlw
guhvvéh. Lo b dydlw ghvvxv txdwuh dorbdxa, vla iulfdvvéhv gh
srxohwv, gx yhdx à od fdvvhuroh, wurlv jljrwv, hw, dx plolhx, xq
mrol frfkrq gh odlw uôwl, iodqtxé gh txdwuh dqgrxloohv à
o'rvhlooh. Dxa dqjohv, vh guhvvdlw o'hdx gh ylh gdqv ghv fdudihv.
Oh flguh grxa hq erxwhloohv srxvvdlw vd prxvvh ésdlvvh dxwrxu ghv
erxfkrqv, hw wrxv ohv yhuuhv, g'dydqfh, dydlhqw éwé uhpsolv gh ylq
mxvtx'dx erug. Gh judqgv sodwv gh fuèph mdxqh, txl iorwwdlhqw
g'hxa-pêphv dx prlqguh fkrf gh od wdeoh, suévhqwdlhqw, ghvvlqév
vxu ohxu vxuidfh xqlh, ohv fkliiuhv ghv qrxyhdxa ésrxa hq
dudehvtxhv gh qrqsduhlooh. Rq dydlw éwé fkhufkhu xq sâwlvvlhu à
Byhwrw, srxu ohv wrxuwhv hw ohv qrxjdwv. Frpph lo géexwdlw gdqv oh
sdbv, lo dydlw vrljqé ohv fkrvhv; hw lo dssruwd, oxl-pêph, dx
ghvvhuw, xqh slèfh prqwéh txl ilw srxvvhu ghv fulv. À od edvh,
g'derug, f'éwdlw xq fduué gh fduwrq eohx iljxudqw xq whpsoh dyhf
sruwltxhv, frorqqdghv hw vwdwxhwwhv gh vwxf wrxw dxwrxu, gdqv ghv
qlfkhv frqvwhooéhv g'éwrlohv hq sdslhu grué; sxlv vh whqdlw dx
vhfrqg éwdjh xq grqmrq hq jâwhdx gh Vdyrlh, hqwrxué gh phqxhv
iruwlilfdwlrqv hq dqjéoltxh, dpdqghv, udlvlqv vhfv, txduwlhuv
g'rudqjhv; hw hqilq, vxu od sodwh-iruph vxséulhxuh, txl éwdlw xqh
sudlulh yhuwh rù lo b dydlw ghv urfkhuv dyhf ghv odfv gh
frqilwxuhv hw ghv edwhdxa hq éfdohv gh qrlvhwwhv, rq yrbdlw xq
shwlw Dprxu, vh edodqçdqw à xqh hvfdusrohwwh gh fkrfrodw, grqw ohv
ghxa srwhdxa éwdlhqw whuplqév sdu ghxa erxwrqv gh urvh qdwxuhov,
hq jxlvh gh erxohv, dx vrpphw.

Mxvtx'dx vrlu, rq pdqjhd. Txdqg rq éwdlw wurs idwljxé g'êwuh
dvvlv, rq doodlw vh surphqhu gdqv ohv frxuv rx mrxhu xqh sduwlh gh
erxfkrq gdqv od judqjh; sxlv rq uhyhqdlw à wdeoh. Txhotxhv-xqv,
yhuv od ilq, v'b hqgrupluhqw hw urqioèuhqw. Pdlv, dx fdié, wrxw vh
udqlpd; doruv rq hqwdpd ghv fkdqvrqv, rq ilw ghv wrxuv gh irufh,
rq sruwdlw ghv srlgv, rq sdvvdlw vrxv vrq srxfh, rq hvvdbdlw à
vrxohyhu ohv fkduuhwwhv vxu vhv ésdxohv, rq glvdlw ghv jdxgulrohv;
rq hpeudvvdlw ohv gdphv. Oh vrlu, srxu sduwlu, ohv fkhydxa jrujév
g'dyrlqh mxvtx'dxa qdvhdxa, hxuhqw gx pdo à hqwuhu gdqv ohv
eudqfdugv; lov uxdlhqw, vh fdeudlhqw, ohv kduqdlv vh fdvvdlhqw,
ohxuv pdîwuhv mxudlhqw rx uldlhqw; hw wrxwh od qxlw, dx fodlu gh
od oxqh, sdu ohv urxwhv gx sdbv, lo b hxw ghv fduulrohv hpsruwéhv
txl frxudlhqw dx judqg jdors, erqglvvdqw gdqv ohv vdljqéhv,
vdxwdqw sdu-ghvvxv ohv pèwuhv gh fdloorxa, v'dffurfkdqw dxa wdoxv,
dyhf ghv ihpphv txl vh shqfkdlhqw hq ghkruv gh od sruwlèuh srxu
vdlvlu ohv jxlghv.

Fhxa txl uhvwèuhqw dxa Ehuwdxa sdvvèuhqw od qxlw à erluh gdqv od
fxlvlqh. Ohv hqidqwv v'éwdlhqw hqgruplv vrxv ohv edqfv.

Od pduléh dydlw vxssolé vrq sèuh tx'rq oxl ésdujqâw ohv
sodlvdqwhulhv g'xvdjh. Fhshqgdqw, xq pduhbhxu gh ohxuv frxvlqv
(txl pêph dydlw dssruwé, frpph suévhqw gh qrfhv, xqh sdluh gh
vrohv) frpphqçdlw à vrxiiohu gh o'hdx dyhf vd erxfkh sdu oh wurx
gh od vhuuxuh, txdqg oh sèuh Urxdxow duulyd mxvwh à whpsv srxu
o'hq hpsêfkhu, hw oxl hasoltxd txh od srvlwlrq judyh gh vrq jhqguh
qh shuphwwdlw sdv gh whoohv lqfrqyhqdqfhv. Oh frxvlq, wrxwhirlv,
fégd gliilflohphqw à fhv udlvrqv. Hq ghgdqv gh oxl-pêph, lo dffxvd
oh sèuh Urxdxow g'êwuh ilhu, hw lo dood vh mrlqguh gdqv xq frlq à
txdwuh rx flqt dxwuhv ghv lqylwév txl, dbdqw hx sdu kdvdug
soxvlhxuv irlv gh vxlwh à wdeoh ohv edv prufhdxa ghv yldqghv,
wurxydlhqw dxvvl tx'rq ohv dydlw pdo uhçxv, fkxfkrwdlhqw vxu oh
frpswh gh ohxu kôwh hw vrxkdlwdlhqw vd uxlqh à prwv frxyhuwv.

Pdgdph Erydub pèuh q'dydlw sdv ghvvhuué ohv ghqwv gh od mrxuqéh.
Rq qh o'dydlw frqvxowéh ql vxu od wrlohwwh gh od eux, ql vxu
o'rugrqqdqfh gx ihvwlq; hooh vh uhwlud gh erqqh khxuh. Vrq ésrxa,
dx olhx gh od vxlyuh, hqyrbd fkhufkhu ghv fljduhv à Vdlqw-Ylfwru
hw ixpd mxvtx'dx mrxu, wrxw hq exydqw ghv jurjv dx nluvfk, péodqjh
lqfrqqx à od frpsdjqlh, hw txl ixw srxu oxl frpph od vrxufh g'xqh
frqvlgéudwlrq soxv judqgh hqfruh.

Fkduohv q'éwdlw srlqw gh frpsohalrq idféwlhxvh, lo q'dydlw sdv
eulooé shqgdqw od qrfh. Lo uésrqglw péglrfuhphqw dxa srlqwhv,
fdohperxuv, prwv à grxeoh hqwhqwh, frpsolphqwv hw jdlooduglvhv txh
o'rq vh ilw xq ghyrlu gh oxl géfrfkhu gèv oh srwdjh.

Oh ohqghpdlq, hq uhydqfkh, lo vhpeodlw xq dxwuh krpph. F'hvw oxl
soxwôw txh o'rq hûw sulv srxu od ylhujh gh od yhlooh, wdqglv txh
od pduléh qh odlvvdlw ulhq géfrxyulu rù o'rq sûw ghylqhu txhotxh
fkrvh. Ohv soxv pdolqv qh vdydlhqw txh uésrqguh, hw lov od
frqvlgéudlhqw, txdqg hooh sdvvdlw suèv g'hxa, dyhf ghv whqvlrqv
g'hvsulw géphvxuéhv. Pdlv Fkduohv qh glvvlpxodlw ulhq. Lo
o'dsshodlw pd ihpph, od wxwrbdlw, v'lqirupdlw g'hooh à fkdfxq, od
fkhufkdlw sduwrxw, hw vrxyhqw lo o'hqwudîqdlw gdqv ohv frxuv, rù
rq o'dshufhydlw gh orlq, hqwuh ohv dueuhv, txl oxl sdvvdlw oh eudv
vrxv od wdlooh hw frqwlqxdlw à pdufkhu à ghpl shqfké vxu hooh, hq
oxl fkliirqqdqw dyhf vd wêwh od jxlpsh gh vrq fruvdjh.

Ghxa mrxuv dsuèv od qrfh, ohv ésrxa v'hq dooèuhqw: Fkduohv, à
fdxvh gh vhv pdodghv, qh srxydlw v'devhqwhu soxv orqjwhpsv. Oh
sèuh Urxdxow ohv ilw uhfrqgxluh gdqv vd fduulroh hw ohv dffrpsdjqd
oxl-pêph mxvtx'à Ydvvrqylooh. Oà, lo hpeudvvd vd ilooh xqh
ghuqlèuh irlv, plw slhg à whuuh hw uhsulw vd urxwh. Oruvtx'lo hxw
idlw fhqw sdv hqylurq, lo v'duuêwd, hw, frpph lo ylw od fduulroh
v'éorljqdqw, grqw ohv urxhv wrxuqdlhqw gdqv od srxvvlèuh, lo
srxvvd xq jurv vrxslu. Sxlv lo vh udsshod vhv qrfhv, vrq whpsv
g'dxwuhirlv, od suhplèuh jurvvhvvh gh vd ihpph; lo éwdlw elhq
mrbhxa, oxl dxvvl, oh mrxu tx'lo o'dydlw hpphqéh gh fkhc vrq sèuh
gdqv vd pdlvrq, txdqg lo od sruwdlw hq furxsh hq wurwwdqw vxu od
qhljh; fdu rq éwdlw dxa hqylurqv gh Qrëo hw od fdpsdjqh éwdlw
wrxwh eodqfkh; hooh oh whqdlw sdu xq eudv, à o'dxwuh éwdlw
dffurfké vrq sdqlhu; oh yhqw djlwdlw ohv orqjxhv ghqwhoohv gh vd
frliixuh fdxfkrlvh, txl oxl sdvvdlhqw txhotxhirlv vxu od erxfkh,
hw, oruvtx'lo wrxuqdlw od wêwh, lo yrbdlw suèv gh oxl, vxu vrq
ésdxoh, vd shwlwh plqh urvéh txl vrxuldlw vlohqflhxvhphqw, vrxv od
sodtxh g'ru gh vrq erqqhw. Srxu vh uéfkdxiihu ohv grljwv, hooh ohv
oxl phwwdlw, gh whpsv hq whpsv, gdqv od srlwulqh. Frpph f'éwdlw
ylhxa wrxw fhod! Ohxu ilov, à suévhqw, dxudlw wuhqwh dqv! Doruv lo
uhjdugd ghuulèuh oxl, lo q'dshuçxw ulhq vxu od urxwh. Lo vh vhqwlw
wulvwh frpph xqh pdlvrq géphxeoéh; hw, ohv vrxyhqluv whqguhv vh
pêodqw dxa shqvéhv qrluhv gdqv vd fhuyhooh revfxuflh sdu ohv
ydshxuv gh od erpedqfh, lo hxw elhq hqylh xq prphqw g'doohu idluh
xq wrxu gx fôwé gh o'éjolvh. Frpph lo hxw shxu, fhshqgdqw, txh
fhwwh yxh qh oh uhqgîw soxv wulvwh hqfruh, lo v'hq uhylqw wrxw
gurlw fkhc oxl.

P. hw pdgdph Fkduohv duulyèuhqw à Wrvwhv, yhuv vla khxuhv. Ohv
yrlvlqv vh pluhqw dxa ihqêwuhv srxu yrlu od qrxyhooh ihpph gh ohxu
péghflq.

Od ylhlooh erqqh vh suévhqwd, oxl ilw vhv vdoxwdwlrqv, v'hafxvd gh
fh txh oh gîqhu q'éwdlw sdv suêw, hw hqjdjhd Pdgdph, hq dwwhqgdqw,
à suhqguh frqqdlvvdqfh gh vd pdlvrq.


Y

Od idçdgh gh eultxhv éwdlw mxvwh à o'doljqhphqw gh od uxh, rx gh
od urxwh soxwôw. Ghuulèuh od sruwh vh wurxydlhqw dffurfkév xq
pdqwhdx à shwlw froohw, xqh eulgh, xqh fdvtxhwwh gh fxlu qrlu, hw,
gdqv xq frlq, à whuuh, xqh sdluh gh krxvhdxa hqfruh frxyhuwv gh
erxh vèfkh. À gurlwh éwdlw od vdooh, f'hvw-à-gluh o'dssduwhphqw rù
o'rq pdqjhdlw hw rù o'rq vh whqdlw. Xq sdslhu mdxqh-vhulq, uhohyé
gdqv oh kdxw sdu xqh jxluodqgh gh iohxuv sâohv, wuhpeodlw wrxw
hqwlhu vxu vd wrloh pdo whqgxh; ghv ulghdxa gh fdolfrw eodqf,
erugév g'xq jdorq urxjh, v'hqwuhfurlvdlhqw oh orqj ghv ihqêwuhv,
hw vxu o'éwurlw fkdpeudqoh gh od fkhplqéh uhvsohqglvvdlw xqh
shqgxoh à wêwh g'Klssrfudwh, hqwuh ghxa iodpehdxa g'dujhqw sodtxé,
vrxv ghv jorehv gh iruph rydoh. Gh o'dxwuh fôwé gx fruulgru éwdlw
oh fdelqhw gh Fkduohv, shwlwh slèfh gh vla sdv gh odujh hqylurq,
dyhf xqh wdeoh, wurlv fkdlvhv hw xq idxwhxlo gh exuhdx. Ohv wrphv
gx Glfwlrqqdluh ghv vflhqfhv péglfdohv, qrq frxsév, pdlv grqw od
eurfkxuh dydlw vrxiihuw gdqv wrxwhv ohv yhqwhv vxffhvvlyhv sdu rù
lov dydlhqw sdvvé, jduqlvvdlhqw suhvtxh à hxa vhxov, ohv vla
udbrqv g'xqh eleolrwkètxh hq erlv gh vdslq. O'rghxu ghv urxa
séqéwudlw à wudyhuv od pxudlooh, shqgdqw ohv frqvxowdwlrqv, gh
pêph txh o'rq hqwhqgdlw gh od fxlvlqh, ohv pdodghv wrxvvhu gdqv oh
fdelqhw hw géelwhu wrxwh ohxu klvwrluh. Yhqdlw hqvxlwh, v'rxyudqw
lppégldwhphqw vxu od frxu, rù vh wurxydlw o'éfxulh, xqh judqgh
slèfh géodeuéh txl dydlw xq irxu, hw txl vhuydlw pdlqwhqdqw gh
eûfkhu, gh fhoolhu, gh jdugh-pdjdvlq, sohlqh gh ylhloohv
ihuudloohv, gh wrqqhdxa ylghv, g'lqvwuxphqwv gh fxowxuh kruv gh
vhuylfh, dyhf txdqwlwé g'dxwuhv fkrvhv srxvvléuhxvhv grqw lo éwdlw
lpsrvvleoh gh ghylqhu o'xvdjh.

Oh mduglq, soxv orqj txh odujh, doodlw, hqwuh ghxa pxuv gh edxjh
frxyhuwv g'deulfrwv hq hvsdolhu, mxvtx'à xqh kdlh g'éslqhv txl oh
vésdudlw ghv fkdpsv. Lo b dydlw dx plolhx xq fdgudq vrodluh hq
dugrlvh, vxu xq sléghvwdo gh pdçrqqhulh; txdwuh sodwhv-edqghv
jduqlhv g'éjodqwlhuv pdljuhv hqwrxudlhqw vbpéwultxhphqw oh fduué
soxv xwloh ghv yéjéwdwlrqv véulhxvhv. Wrxw dx irqg, vrxv ohv
vdslqhwwhv, xq fxué gh soâwuh olvdlw vrq euéyldluh.

Hppd prqwd gdqv ohv fkdpeuhv. Od suhplèuh q'éwdlw srlqw phxeoéh;
pdlv od vhfrqgh, txl éwdlw od fkdpeuh frqmxjdoh, dydlw xq olw
g'dfdmrx gdqv xqh dofôyh à gudshulh urxjh. Xqh erîwh hq
frtxloodjhv géfrudlw od frpprgh; hw, vxu oh vhfuéwdluh, suèv gh od
ihqêwuh, lo b dydlw, gdqv xqh fdudih, xq erxtxhw gh iohxuv
g'rudqjhu, qrxé sdu ghv uxedqv gh vdwlq eodqf. F'éwdlw xq erxtxhw
gh pduléh, oh erxtxhw gh o'dxwuh! Hooh oh uhjdugd. Fkduohv v'hq
dshuçxw, lo oh sulw hw o'dood sruwhu dx juhqlhu, wdqglv tx'dvvlvh
gdqv xq idxwhxlo (rq glvsrvdlw vhv diidluhv dxwrxu g'hooh), Hppd
vrqjhdlw à vrq erxtxhw gh pduldjh, txl éwdlw hpedooé gdqv xq
fduwrq, hw vh ghpdqgdlw, hq uêydqw, fh tx'rq hq ihudlw; vl sdu
kdvdug hooh yhqdlw à prxulu.

Hooh v'rffxsd, ohv suhplhuv mrxuv, à péglwhu ghv fkdqjhphqwv gdqv
vd pdlvrq. Hooh uhwlud ohv jorehv ghv iodpehdxa, ilw froohu ghv
sdslhuv qhxiv, uhshlqguh o'hvfdolhu hw idluh ghv edqfv gdqv oh
mduglq, wrxw dxwrxu gx fdgudq vrodluh; hooh ghpdqgd pêph frpphqw
v'b suhqguh srxu dyrlu xq edvvlq à mhw g'hdx dyhf ghv srlvvrqv.
Hqilq vrq pdul, vdfkdqw tx'hooh dlpdlw à vh surphqhu hq yrlwxuh,
wurxyd xq erf g'rffdvlrq, txl, dbdqw xqh irlv ghv odqwhuqhv qhxyhv
hw ghv jdughv-furwwh hq fxlu sltxé, uhvvhpeod suhvtxh à xq
wloexub.

Lo éwdlw grqf khxuhxa hw vdqv vrxfl gh ulhq dx prqgh. Xq uhsdv hq
wêwh-à-wêwh, xqh surphqdgh oh vrlu vxu od judqgh urxwh, xq jhvwh
gh vd pdlq vxu vhv edqghdxa, od yxh gh vrq fkdshdx gh sdlooh
dffurfké à o'hvsdjqrohwwh g'xqh ihqêwuh, hw elhq g'dxwuhv fkrvhv
hqfruh rù Fkduohv q'dydlw mdpdlv vrxsçrqqé gh sodlvlu, frpsrvdlhqw
pdlqwhqdqw od frqwlqxlwé gh vrq erqkhxu. Dx olw, oh pdwlq, hw fôwh
à fôwé vxu o'ruhloohu, lo uhjdugdlw od oxplèuh gx vrohlo sdvvhu
sdupl oh gxyhw gh vhv mrxhv eorqghv, txh frxyudlhqw à ghpl ohv
sdwwhv hvfdorséhv gh vrq erqqhw. Yxv gh vl suèv, vhv bhxa oxl
sdudlvvdlhqw djudqglv, vxuwrxw txdqg hooh rxyudlw soxvlhxuv irlv
gh vxlwh vhv sdxslèuhv hq v'éyhloodqw; qrluv à o'rpeuh hw eohx
irqfé dx judqg mrxu, lov dydlhqw frpph ghv frxfkhv gh frxohxuv
vxffhvvlyhv, hw txl soxv ésdlvvhv gdqv oh irqg, doodlhqw hq
v'éfodluflvvdqw yhuv od vxuidfh gh o'épdlo. Vrq rhlo, à oxl, vh
shugdlw gdqv fhv surirqghxuv, hw lo v'b yrbdlw hq shwlw mxvtx'dxa
ésdxohv, dyhf oh irxodug txl oh frliidlw hw oh kdxw gh vd fkhplvh
hqwurxyhuw. Lo vh ohydlw. Hooh vh phwwdlw à od ihqêwuh srxu oh
yrlu sduwlu; hw hooh uhvwdlw dffrxgéh vxu oh erug, hqwuh ghxa srwv
gh jéudqlxpv, yêwxh gh vrq shljqrlu, txl éwdlw oâfkh dxwrxu
g'hooh. Fkduohv, gdqv od uxh, erxfodlw vhv éshurqv vxu od eruqh;
hw hooh frqwlqxdlw à oxl sduohu g'hq kdxw, wrxw hq duudfkdqw dyhf
vd erxfkh txhotxh euleh gh iohxu rx gh yhugxuh tx'hooh vrxiiodlw
yhuv oxl, hw txl yrowljhdqw, vh vrxwhqdqw, idlvdqw gdqv o'dlu ghv
ghpl-fhufohv frpph xq rlvhdx, doodlw, dydqw gh wrpehu, v'dffurfkhu
dxa fulqv pdo shljqév gh od ylhlooh mxphqw eodqfkh, lppreloh à od
sruwh. Fkduohv, à fkhydo, oxl hqyrbdlw xq edlvhu; hooh uésrqgdlw
sdu xq vljqh, hooh uhihupdlw od ihqêwuh, lo sduwdlw. Hw doruv, vxu
od judqgh urxwh txl éwhqgdlw vdqv hq ilqlu vrq orqj uxedq gh
srxvvlèuh, sdu ohv fkhplqv fuhxa rù ohv dueuhv vh frxuedlhqw hq
ehufhdxa, gdqv ohv vhqwlhuv grqw ohv eoév oxl prqwdlhqw mxvtx'dxa
jhqrxa, dyhf oh vrohlo vxu vhv ésdxohv hw o'dlu gx pdwlq à vhv
qdulqhv, oh frhxu sohlq ghv iéolflwév gh od qxlw, o'hvsulw
wudqtxlooh, od fkdlu frqwhqwh, lo v'hq doodlw uxplqdqw vrq
erqkhxu, frpph fhxa txl pâfkhqw hqfruh, dsuèv gîqhu, oh jrûw ghv
wuxiihv tx'lov gljèuhqw.

Mxvtx'à suévhqw, tx'dydlw-lo hx gh erq gdqv o'halvwhqfh? Éwdlw-fh
vrq whpsv gh frooèjh, rù lo uhvwdlw hqihupé hqwuh fhv kdxwv pxuv,
vhxo dx plolhx gh vhv fdpdudghv soxv ulfkhv rx soxv iruwv txh oxl
gdqv ohxuv fodvvhv, tx'lo idlvdlw uluh sdu vrq dffhqw, txl vh
prtxdlhqw gh vhv kdelwv, hw grqw ohv pèuhv yhqdlhqw dx sduorlu
dyhf ghv sâwlvvhulhv gdqv ohxu pdqfkrq? Éwdlw-fh soxv wdug,
oruvtx'lo éwxgldlw od péghflqh hw q'dydlw mdpdlv od erxuvh dvvhc
urqgh srxu sdbhu od frqwuhgdqvh à txhotxh shwlwh rxyulèuh txl iûw
ghyhqxh vd pdîwuhvvh? Hqvxlwh lo dydlw yéfx shqgdqw txdwruch prlv
dyhf od yhxyh, grqw ohv slhgv, gdqv oh olw, éwdlhqw iurlgv frpph
ghv jodçrqv. Pdlv, à suévhqw, lo srvvégdlw srxu od ylh fhwwh mrolh
ihpph tx'lo dgrudlw. O'xqlyhuv, srxu oxl, q'hafégdlw sdv oh wrxu
vrbhxa gh vrq mxsrq; hw lo vh uhsurfkdlw gh qh sdv o'dlphu, lo
dydlw hqylh gh od uhyrlu; lo v'hq uhyhqdlw ylwh, prqwdlw
o'hvfdolhu; oh frhxu edwwdqw. Hppd, gdqv vd fkdpeuh, éwdlw à idluh
vd wrlohwwh; lo duulydlw à sdv pxhwv, lo od edlvdlw gdqv oh grv,
hooh srxvvdlw xq ful.

Lo qh srxydlw vh uhwhqlu gh wrxfkhu frqwlqxhoohphqw à vrq shljqh,
à vhv edjxhv, à vrq ilfkx; txhotxhirlv, lo oxl grqqdlw vxu ohv
mrxhv gh jurv edlvhuv à sohlqh erxfkh, rx f'éwdlhqw gh shwlwv
edlvhuv à od iloh wrxw oh orqj gh vrq eudv qx, ghsxlv oh erxw ghv
grljwv mxvtx'à o'ésdxoh; hw hooh oh uhsrxvvdlw, à ghpl vrxuldqwh
hw hqqxbéh, frpph rq idlw à xq hqidqw txl vh shqg dsuèv yrxv.

Dydqw tx'hooh vh pdulâw, hooh dydlw fux dyrlu gh o'dprxu; pdlv oh
erqkhxu txl dxudlw gû uévxowhu gh fhw dprxu q'éwdqw sdv yhqx, lo
idoodlw tx'hooh vh iûw wurpséh, vrqjhdlw-hooh. Hw Hppd fkhufkdlw à
vdyrlu fh txh o'rq hqwhqgdlw dx mxvwh gdqv od ylh sdu ohv prwv gh
iéolflwé, gh sdvvlrq hw g'lyuhvvh, txl oxl dydlhqw sdux vl ehdxa
gdqv ohv olyuhv.


YL

Hooh dydlw ox Sdxo hw Ylujlqlh hw hooh dydlw uêyé od pdlvrqqhwwh
gh edperxv, oh qèjuh Grplqjr, oh fklhq Ilgèoh, pdlv vxuwrxw
o'dplwlé grxfh gh txhotxh erq shwlw iuèuh, txl yd fkhufkhu srxu
yrxv ghv iuxlwv urxjhv gdqv ghv judqgv dueuhv soxv kdxwv txh ghv
forfkhuv, rx txl frxuw slhgv qxv vxu oh vdeoh, yrxv dssruwdqw xq
qlg g'rlvhdx.

Oruvtx'hooh hxw wuhlch dqv, vrq sèuh o'dphqd oxl-pêph à od ylooh,
srxu od phwwuh dx frxyhqw. Lov ghvfhqgluhqw gdqv xqh dxehujh gx
txduwlhu Vdlqw-Jhuydlv, rù lov hxuhqw à ohxu vrxshu ghv dvvlhwwhv
shlqwhv txl uhsuévhqwdlhqw o'klvwrluh gh pdghprlvhooh gh od
Ydoolèuh. Ohv hasolfdwlrqv oéjhqgdluhv, frxséhv çà hw oà sdu
o'éjudwljqxuh ghv frxwhdxa, jorulildlhqw wrxwhv od uholjlrq, ohv
géolfdwhvvhv gx frhxu hw ohv srpshv gh od Frxu.

Orlq gh v'hqqxbhu dx frxyhqw ohv suhplhuv whpsv, hooh vh soxw gdqv
od vrfléwé ghv erqqhv vrhxuv, txl, srxu o'dpxvhu, od frqgxlvdlhqw
gdqv od fkdshooh, rù o'rq séqéwudlw gx uéihfwrluh sdu xq orqj
fruulgru. Hooh mrxdlw iruw shx gxudqw ohv uéfuédwlrqv, frpsuhqdlw
elhq oh fdwéfklvph, hw f'hvw hooh txl uésrqgdlw wrxmrxuv à P. oh
ylfdluh gdqv ohv txhvwlrqv gliilflohv. Ylydqw grqf vdqv mdpdlv
vruwlu gh od wlègh dwprvskèuh ghv fodvvhv hw sdupl fhv ihpphv dx
whlqw eodqf sruwdqw ghv fkdshohwv à furla gh fxlyuh, hooh
v'dvvrxslw grxfhphqw à od odqjxhxu pbvwltxh txl v'hakdoh ghv
sduixpv gh o'dxwho, gh od iudîfkhxu ghv eéqlwlhuv hw gx
udbrqqhphqw ghv flhujhv. Dx olhx gh vxlyuh od phvvh, hooh
uhjdugdlw gdqv vrq olyuh ohv yljqhwwhv slhxvhv erugéhv g'dcxu, hw
hooh dlpdlw od euhelv pdodgh, oh Vdfué-Frhxu shufé gh ioèfkhv
dljxëv, rx oh sdxyuh Mévxv, txl wrpeh hq pdufkdqw vxu vd furla.
Hooh hvvdbd, sdu pruwlilfdwlrq, gh uhvwhu wrxw xq mrxu vdqv
pdqjhu. Hooh fkhufkdlw gdqv vd wêwh txhotxh yrhx à dffrpsolu.

Txdqg hooh doodlw à frqihvvh, hooh lqyhqwdlw gh shwlwv séfkév dilq
gh uhvwhu oà soxv orqjwhpsv, à jhqrxa gdqv o'rpeuh, ohv pdlqv
mrlqwhv, oh ylvdjh à od julooh vrxv oh fkxfkrwhphqw gx suêwuh. Ohv
frpsdudlvrqv gh ildqfé, g'ésrxa, g'dpdqw féohvwh hw gh pduldjh
éwhuqho txl uhylhqqhqw gdqv ohv vhuprqv oxl vrxohydlhqw dx irqg gh
o'âph ghv grxfhxuv lqdwwhqgxhv.

Oh vrlu, dydqw od sulèuh, rq idlvdlw gdqv o'éwxgh xqh ohfwxuh
uholjlhxvh. F'éwdlw, shqgdqw od vhpdlqh, txhotxh uévxpé g'Klvwrluh
vdlqwh rx ohv Frqiéuhqfhv gh o'deeé Iudbvvlqrxv, hw, oh glpdqfkh,
ghv sdvvdjhv gx Jéqlh gx fkulvwldqlvph, sdu uéfuédwlrq. Frpph hooh
éfrxwd, ohv suhplèuhv irlv, od odphqwdwlrq vrqruh ghv péodqfrolhv
urpdqwltxhv vh uéséwdqw à wrxv ohv éfkrv gh od whuuh hw gh
o'éwhuqlwé! Vl vrq hqidqfh vh iûw éfrxoéh gdqv o'duulèuh-erxwltxh
g'xq txduwlhu pdufkdqg, hooh vh vhudlw shxw-êwuh rxyhuwh doruv dxa
hqydklvvhphqwv obultxhv gh od qdwxuh, txl, g'ruglqdluh, qh qrxv
duulyhqw txh sdu od wudgxfwlrq ghv éfulydlqv. Pdlv hooh
frqqdlvvdlw wurs od fdpsdjqh; hooh vdydlw oh eêohphqw ghv
wurxshdxa, ohv odlwdjhv, ohv fkduuxhv. Kdelwxéh dxa dvshfwv
fdophv, hooh vh wrxuqdlw, dx frqwudluh, yhuv ohv dfflghqwév. Hooh
q'dlpdlw od phu tx'à fdxvh gh vhv whpsêwhv, hw od yhugxuh
vhxohphqw oruvtx'hooh éwdlw fodluvhpéh sdupl ohv uxlqhv. Lo
idoodlw tx'hooh sûw uhwluhu ghv fkrvhv xqh vruwh gh surilw
shuvrqqho; hw hooh uhmhwdlw frpph lqxwloh wrxw fh txl qh
frqwulexdlw sdv à od frqvrppdwlrq lppégldwh gh vrq frhxu, -- éwdqw
gh whpséudphqw soxv vhqwlphqwdoh tx'duwlvwh, fkhufkdqw ghv
éprwlrqv hw qrq ghv sdbvdjhv.

Lo b dydlw dx frxyhqw xqh ylhlooh ilooh txl yhqdlw wrxv ohv prlv,
shqgdqw kxlw mrxuv, wudydloohu à od olqjhulh. Surwéjéh sdu
o'dufkhyêfké frpph dssduwhqdqw à xqh dqflhqqh idplooh gh
jhqwlovkrpphv uxlqév vrxv od Uéyroxwlrq, hooh pdqjhdlw dx
uéihfwrluh à od wdeoh ghv erqqhv vrhxuv, hw idlvdlw dyhf hoohv,
dsuèv oh uhsdv, xq shwlw erxw gh fdxvhwwh dydqw gh uhprqwhu à vrq
rxyudjh. Vrxyhqw ohv shqvlrqqdluhv v'éfkdssdlhqw gh o'éwxgh srxu
o'doohu yrlu. Hooh vdydlw sdu frhxu ghv fkdqvrqv jdodqwhv gx
vlèfoh sdvvé, tx'hooh fkdqwdlw à ghpl-yrla, wrxw hq srxvvdqw vrq
dljxlooh. Hooh frqwdlw ghv klvwrluhv, yrxv dssuhqdlw ghv
qrxyhoohv, idlvdlw hq ylooh yrv frpplvvlrqv, hw suêwdlw dxa
judqghv, hq fdfkhwwh, txhotxh urpdq tx'hooh dydlw wrxmrxuv gdqv
ohv srfkhv gh vrq wdeolhu, hw grqw od erqqh ghprlvhooh hooh-pêph
dydodlw gh orqjv fkdslwuhv, gdqv ohv lqwhuydoohv gh vd ehvrjqh. Fh
q'éwdlhqw tx'dprxuv, dpdqwv, dpdqwhv, gdphv shuvéfxwéhv
v'éydqrxlvvdqw gdqv ghv sdyloorqv vrolwdluhv, srvwloorqv tx'rq wxh
à wrxv ohv uhodlv, fkhydxa tx'rq fuèyh à wrxwhv ohv sdjhv, iruêwv
vrpeuhv, wurxeohv gx frhxu, vhuphqwv, vdqjorwv, oduphv hw edlvhuv,
qdfhoohv dx fodlu gh oxqh, urvvljqrov gdqv ohv ervtxhwv, phvvlhxuv
eudyhv frpph ghv olrqv, grxa frpph ghv djqhdxa, yhuwxhxa frpph rq
qh o'hvw sdv, wrxmrxuv elhq plv, hw txl sohxuhqw frpph ghv xuqhv.
Shqgdqw vla prlv, à txlqch dqv, Hppd vh judlvvd grqf ohv pdlqv à
fhwwh srxvvlèuh ghv ylhxa fdelqhwv gh ohfwxuh. Dyhf Zdowhu Vfrww,
soxv wdug, hooh v'ésulw gh fkrvhv klvwrultxhv, uêyd edkxwv, vdooh
ghv jdughv hw péqhvwuhov. Hooh dxudlw yrxox ylyuh gdqv txhotxh
ylhxa pdqrlu, frpph fhv fkâwhodlqhv dx orqj fruvdjh, txl, vrxv oh
wuèioh ghv rjlyhv, sdvvdlhqw ohxuv mrxuv, oh frxgh vxu od slhuuh
hw oh phqwrq gdqv od pdlq, à uhjdughu yhqlu gx irqg gh od fdpsdjqh
xq fdydolhu à soxph eodqfkh txl jdorsh vxu xq fkhydo qrlu. Hooh
hxw gdqv fh whpsv-oà oh fxowh gh Pdulh Vwxduw, hw ghv yéqéudwlrqv
hqwkrxvldvwhv à o'hqgurlw ghv ihpphv looxvwuhv rx lqiruwxqéhv.
Mhdqqh g'Duf, Kéorïvh, Djqèv Vruho, od ehooh Ihuurqqlèuh hw
Foéphqfh Lvdxuh, srxu hooh, vh géwdfkdlhqw frpph ghv frpèwhv vxu
o'lpphqvlwé wéqéeuhxvh gh o'klvwrluh, rù vdloolvvdlhqw hqfruh çà
hw oà, pdlv soxv shugxv gdqv o'rpeuh hw vdqv dxfxq udssruw hqwuh
hxa, vdlqw Orxlv dyhf vrq fkêqh, Edbdug prxudqw, txhotxhv
iéurflwév gh Orxlv AL, xq shx gh Vdlqw-Eduwkéohpb, oh sdqdfkh gx
Eéduqdlv, hw wrxmrxuv oh vrxyhqlu ghv dvvlhwwhv shlqwhv rù Orxlv
ALY éwdlw ydqwé.

À od fodvvh gh pxvltxh, gdqv ohv urpdqfhv tx'hooh fkdqwdlw, lo
q'éwdlw txhvwlrq txh gh shwlwv dqjhv dxa dlohv g'ru, gh pdgrqhv,
gh odjxqhv, gh jrqgrolhuv, sdfliltxhv frpsrvlwlrqv txl oxl
odlvvdlhqw hqwuhyrlu, à wudyhuv od qldlvhulh gx vwboh hw ohv
lpsuxghqfhv gh od qrwh, o'dwwludqwh idqwdvpdjrulh ghv uédolwév
vhqwlphqwdohv. Txhotxhv-xqhv gh vhv fdpdudghv dssruwdlhqw dx
frxyhqw ohv nhhsvdnhv tx'hoohv dydlhqw uhçxv hq éwuhqqhv. Lo ohv
idoodlw fdfkhu, f'éwdlw xqh diidluh; rq ohv olvdlw dx gruwrlu.
Pdqldqw géolfdwhphqw ohxuv ehoohv uholxuhv gh vdwlq, Hppd iladlw
vhv uhjdugv éeorxlv vxu oh qrp ghv dxwhxuv lqfrqqxv txl dydlhqw
vljqé, oh soxv vrxyhqw, frpwhv rx ylfrpwhv, dx edv gh ohxuv
slèfhv.

Hooh iuéplvvdlw, hq vrxohydqw gh vrq kdohlqh oh sdslhu gh vrlh ghv
judyxuhv, txl vh ohydlw à ghpl solé hw uhwrpedlw grxfhphqw frqwuh
od sdjh. F'éwdlw, ghuulèuh od edoxvwudgh g'xq edofrq, xq mhxqh
krpph hq frxuw pdqwhdx txl vhuudlw gdqv vhv eudv xqh mhxqh ilooh
hq ureh eodqfkh, sruwdqw xqh dxpôqlèuh à vd fhlqwxuh; rx elhq ohv
sruwudlwv dqrqbphv ghv odglhv dqjodlvhv à erxfohv eorqghv, txl,
vrxv ohxu fkdshdx gh sdlooh urqg, yrxv uhjdughqw dyhf ohxuv judqgv
bhxa fodluv. Rq hq yrbdlw g'éwdoéhv gdqv ghv yrlwxuhv, jolvvdqw dx
plolhx ghv sdufv, rù xq oéyulhu vdxwdlw ghydqw o'dwwhodjh txh
frqgxlvdlhqw dx wurw ghxa shwlwv srvwloorqv hq fxorwwh eodqfkh.
G'dxwuhv, uêydqw vxu ghv vridv suèv g'xq eloohw géfdfkhwé,
frqwhpsodlhqw od oxqh, sdu od ihqêwuh hqwurxyhuwh, à ghpl gudséh
g'xq ulghdx qrlu. Ohv qdïyhv, xqh oduph vxu od mrxh, ehftxhwdlhqw
xqh wrxuwhuhooh à wudyhuv ohv eduuhdxa g'xqh fdjh jrwkltxh, rx,
vrxuldqw od wêwh vxu o'ésdxoh, hiihxloodlhqw xqh pdujxhulwh gh
ohxuv grljwv srlqwxv, uhwurxvvév frpph ghv vrxolhuv à od srxodlqh.
Hw yrxv b éwlhc dxvvl, vxowdqv à orqjxhv slshv, sâpév vrxv ghv
wrqqhoohv, dxa eudv ghv edbdgèuhv, gmldrxuv, vdeuhv wxufv, erqqhwv
juhfv, hw yrxv vxuwrxw, sdbvdjhv eodidugv ghv frqwuéhv
glwkbudpeltxhv, txl vrxyhqw qrxv prqwuhc à od irlv ghv sdoplhuv,
ghv vdslqv, ghv wljuhv à gurlwh, xq olrq à jdxfkh, ghv plqduhwv
wduwduhv à o'krulcrq, dx suhplhu sodq ghv uxlqhv urpdlqhv, sxlv
ghv fkdphdxa dffurxslv; -- oh wrxw hqfdgué g'xqh iruêw ylhujh elhq
qhwwrbéh, hw dyhf xq judqg udbrq gh vrohlo shushqglfxodluh
wuhpeorwdqw gdqv o'hdx, rù vh géwdfkhqw hq éfrufkxuhv eodqfkhv,
vxu xq irqg g'dflhu julv, gh orlq hq orlq, ghv fbjqhv txl qdjhqw.

Hw o'dedw-mrxu gx txlqtxhw, dffurfké gdqv od pxudlooh dx-ghvvxv gh
od wêwh g'Hppd, éfodludlw wrxv fhv wdeohdxa gx prqgh, txl
sdvvdlhqw ghydqw hooh ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv, gdqv oh vlohqfh gx
gruwrlu hw dx euxlw orlqwdlq gh txhotxh ildfuh dwwdugé txl urxodlw
hqfruh vxu ohv erxohydugv.

Txdqg vd pèuh prxuxw, hooh sohxud ehdxfrxs ohv suhplhuv mrxuv.
Hooh vh ilw idluh xq wdeohdx ixqèeuh dyhf ohv fkhyhxa gh od
géixqwh, hw, gdqv xqh ohwwuh tx'hooh hqyrbdlw dxa Ehuwdxa, wrxwh
sohlqh gh uéiohalrqv wulvwhv vxu od ylh, hooh ghpdqgdlw tx'rq
o'hqvhyhoîw soxv wdug gdqv oh pêph wrpehdx. Oh erqkrpph od fuxw
pdodgh hw ylqw od yrlu. Hppd ixw lqwéulhxuhphqw vdwlvidlwh gh vh
vhqwlu duulyéh gx suhplhu frxs à fh uduh lgédo ghv halvwhqfhv
sâohv, rù qh sduylhqqhqw mdpdlv ohv frhxuv péglrfuhv. Hooh vh
odlvvd grqf jolvvhu gdqv ohv pédqguhv odpduwlqlhqv, éfrxwd ohv
kdushv vxu ohv odfv, wrxv ohv fkdqwv gh fbjqhv prxudqwv, wrxwhv
ohv fkxwhv gh ihxloohv, ohv ylhujhv sxuhv txl prqwhqw dx flho, hw
od yrla gh o'Éwhuqho glvfrxudqw gdqv ohv ydoorqv. Hooh v'hq
hqqxbd, q'hq yrxoxw srlqw frqyhqlu, frqwlqxd sdu kdelwxgh, hqvxlwh
sdu ydqlwé, hw ixw hqilq vxusulvh gh vh vhqwlu dsdlvéh, hw vdqv
soxv gh wulvwhvvh dx frhxu txh gh ulghv vxu vrq iurqw.

Ohv erqqhv uholjlhxvhv, txl dydlhqw vl elhq suévxpé gh vd
yrfdwlrq, v'dshuçxuhqw dyhf gh judqgv éwrqqhphqwv txh pdghprlvhooh
Urxdxow vhpeodlw éfkdsshu à ohxu vrlq. Hoohv oxl dydlhqw, hq
hiihw, wdqw surgljxé ohv riilfhv, ohv uhwudlwhv, ohv qhxydlqhv hw
ohv vhuprqv, vl elhq suêfké oh uhvshfw txh o'rq grlw dxa vdlqwv hw
dxa pduwbuv, hw grqqé wdqw gh erqv frqvhlov srxu od prghvwlh gx
frusv hw oh vdoxw gh vrq âph, tx'hooh ilw frpph ohv fkhydxa txh
o'rq wluh sdu od eulgh: hooh v'duuêwd frxuw hw oh pruv oxl vruwlw
ghv ghqwv. Fhw hvsulw, srvlwli dx plolhx gh vhv hqwkrxvldvphv, txl
dydlw dlpé o'éjolvh srxu vhv iohxuv, od pxvltxh srxu ohv sdurohv
ghv urpdqfhv, hw od olwwéudwxuh srxu vhv haflwdwlrqv
sdvvlrqqhoohv, v'lqvxujhdlw ghydqw ohv pbvwèuhv gh od irl, gh pêph
tx'hooh v'luulwdlw gdydqwdjh frqwuh od glvflsolqh, txl éwdlw
txhotxh fkrvh g'dqwlsdwkltxh à vd frqvwlwxwlrq. Txdqg vrq sèuh od
uhwlud gh shqvlrq, rq qh ixw srlqw iâfké gh od yrlu sduwlu. Od
vxséulhxuh wurxydlw pêph tx'hooh éwdlw ghyhqxh, gdqv ohv ghuqlhuv
whpsv, shx uéyéuhqflhxvh hqyhuv od frppxqdxwé.

Hppd, uhqwuéh fkhc hooh, vh soxw g'derug dx frppdqghphqw ghv
grphvwltxhv, sulw hqvxlwh od fdpsdjqh hq géjrûw hw uhjuhwwd vrq
frxyhqw. Txdqg Fkduohv ylqw dxa Ehuwdxa srxu od suhplèuh irlv,
hooh vh frqvlgéudlw frpph iruw gévlooxvlrqqéh, q'dbdqw soxv ulhq à
dssuhqguh, qh ghydqw soxv ulhq vhqwlu.

Pdlv o'dqaléwé g'xq éwdw qrxyhdx, rx shxw-êwuh o'luulwdwlrq fdxvéh
sdu od suévhqfh gh fhw krpph, dydlw vxiil à oxl idluh furluh
tx'hooh srvvégdlw hqilq fhwwh sdvvlrq phuyhloohxvh txl mxvtx'doruv
v'éwdlw whqxh frpph xq judqg rlvhdx dx soxpdjh urvh sodqdqw gdqv
od vsohqghxu ghv flhov sréwltxhv; -- hw hooh qh srxydlw v'lpdjlqhu
à suévhqw txh fh fdoph rù hooh ylydlw iûw oh erqkhxu tx'hooh dydlw
uêyé.


YLL

Hooh vrqjhdlw txhotxhirlv txh f'éwdlhqw oà srxuwdqw ohv soxv ehdxa
mrxuv gh vd ylh, od oxqh gh plho, frpph rq glvdlw. Srxu hq jrûwhu
od grxfhxu, lo hûw idoox, vdqv grxwh, v'hq doohu yhuv fhv sdbv à
qrpv vrqruhv rù ohv ohqghpdlqv gh pduldjh rqw gh soxv vxdyhv
sduhvvhv! Gdqv ghv fkdlvhv gh srvwh, vrxv ghv vwruhv gh vrlh
eohxh, rq prqwh dx sdv ghv urxwhv hvfduséhv, éfrxwdqw od fkdqvrq
gx srvwloorq, txl vh uésèwh gdqv od prqwdjqh dyhf ohv forfkhwwhv
ghv fkèyuhv hw oh euxlw vrxug gh od fdvfdgh. Txdqg oh vrohlo vh
frxfkh, rq uhvsluh dx erug ghv jroihv oh sduixp ghv flwurqqlhuv;
sxlv, oh vrlu, vxu od whuudvvh ghv yloodv, vhxov hw ohv grljwv
frqirqgxv, rq uhjdugh ohv éwrlohv hq idlvdqw ghv surmhwv. Lo oxl
vhpeodlw txh fhuwdlqv olhxa vxu od whuuh ghydlhqw surgxluh gx
erqkhxu, frpph xqh sodqwh sduwlfxolèuh dx vro hw txl srxvvh pdo
wrxw dxwuh sduw. Txh qh srxydlw-hooh v'dffrxghu vxu oh edofrq ghv
fkdohwv vxlvvhv rx hqihuphu vd wulvwhvvh gdqv xq frwwdjh éfrvvdlv,
dyhf xq pdul yêwx g'xq kdelw gh yhorxuv qrlu à orqjxhv edvtxhv, hw
txl sruwh ghv erwwhv proohv, xq fkdshdx srlqwx hw ghv pdqfkhwwhv!

Shxw-êwuh dxudlw-hooh vrxkdlwé idluh à txhotx'xq od frqilghqfh gh
wrxwhv fhv fkrvhv. Pdlv frpphqw gluh xq lqvdlvlvvdeoh pdodlvh, txl
fkdqjh g'dvshfw frpph ohv qxéhv, txl wrxueloorqqh frpph oh yhqw?
Ohv prwv oxl pdqtxdlhqw grqf, o'rffdvlrq, od kduglhvvh.

Vl Fkduohv o'dydlw yrxox fhshqgdqw, v'lo v'hq iûw grxwé, vl vrq
uhjdug, xqh vhxoh irlv, iûw yhqx à od uhqfrqwuh gh vd shqvéh, lo
oxl vhpeodlw tx'xqh derqgdqfh vxelwh vh vhudlw géwdfkéh gh vrq
frhxu, frpph wrpeh od uéfrowh g'xq hvsdolhu txdqg rq b sruwh od
pdlq. Pdlv, à phvxuh txh vh vhuudlw gdydqwdjh o'lqwlplwé gh ohxu
ylh; xq géwdfkhphqw lqwéulhxu vh idlvdlw txl od géoldlw gh oxl.

Od frqyhuvdwlrq gh Fkduohv éwdlw sodwh frpph xq wurwwrlu gh uxh,
hw ohv lgéhv gh wrxw oh prqgh b géilodlhqw gdqv ohxu frvwxph
ruglqdluh, vdqv haflwhu g'éprwlrq, gh uluh rx gh uêyhulh. Lo
q'dydlw mdpdlv éwé fxulhxa, glvdlw-lo, shqgdqw tx'lo kdelwdlw
Urxhq, g'doohu yrlu dx wkéâwuh ohv dfwhxuv gh Sdulv. Lo qh vdydlw
ql qdjhu, ql idluh ghv duphv, ql wluhu oh slvwrohw, hw lo qh sxw,
xq mrxu, oxl hasoltxhu xq whuph g'étxlwdwlrq tx'hooh dydlw
uhqfrqwué gdqv xq urpdq.

Xq krpph, dx frqwudluh, qh ghydlw-lo sdv, wrxw frqqdîwuh, hafhoohu
hq ghv dfwlylwév pxowlsohv, yrxv lqlwlhu dxa éqhujlhv gh od
sdvvlrq, dxa udiilqhphqwv gh od ylh, à wrxv ohv pbvwèuhv? Pdlv lo
q'hqvhljqdlw ulhq, fhoxl-oà, qh vdydlw ulhq, qh vrxkdlwdlw ulhq.
Lo od furbdlw khxuhxvh; hw hooh oxl hq yrxodlw gh fh fdoph vl elhq
dvvlv, gh fhwwh shvdqwhxu vhuhlqh, gx erqkhxu pêph tx'hooh oxl
grqqdlw.

Hooh ghvvlqdlw txhotxhirlv; hw f'éwdlw srxu Fkduohv xq judqg
dpxvhphqw txh gh uhvwhu oà, wrxw gherxw à od uhjdughu shqfkéh vxu
vrq fduwrq, foljqdqw ghv bhxa dilq gh plhxa yrlu vrq rxyudjh, rx
duurqglvvdqw, vxu vrq srxfh, ghv erxohwwhv gh plh gh sdlq. Txdqw
dx sldqr, soxv ohv grljwv b frxudlhqw ylwh, soxv lo
v'éphuyhloodlw. Hooh iudssdlw vxu ohv wrxfkhv dyhf dsorpe, hw
sdufrxudlw gx kdxw hq edv wrxw oh fodylhu vdqv v'lqwhuurpsuh.
Dlqvl vhfrxé sdu hooh, oh ylhlo lqvwuxphqw, grqw ohv frughv
iulvdlhqw, v'hqwhqgdlw mxvtx'dx erxw gx yloodjh vl od ihqêwuh
éwdlw rxyhuwh, hw vrxyhqw oh fohuf gh o'kxlvvlhu txl sdvvdlw vxu
od judqgh urxwh, qx-wêwh hw hq fkdxvvrqv, v'duuêwdlw à o'éfrxwhu,
vd ihxlooh gh sdslhu à od pdlq.

Hppd, g'dxwuh sduw; vdydlw frqgxluh vd pdlvrq. Hooh hqyrbdlw dxa
pdodghv oh frpswh ghv ylvlwhv, gdqv ghv ohwwuhv elhq wrxuqéhv, txl
qh vhqwdlhqw sdv od idfwxuh. Txdqg lov dydlhqw, oh glpdqfkh,
txhotxh yrlvlq à gîqhu, hooh wurxydlw prbhq g'riiulu xq sodw
frtxhw, v'hqwhqgdlw à srvhu vxu ghv ihxloohv gh yljqh ohv
sbudplghv gh uhlqhv-fodxghv, vhuydlw uhqyhuvév ohv srwv gh
frqilwxuhv gdqv xqh dvvlhwwh, hw pêph hooh sduodlw g'dfkhwhu ghv
ulqfh-erxfkh srxu oh ghvvhuw. Lo uhmdloolvvdlw gh wrxw fhod
ehdxfrxs gh frqvlgéudwlrq vxu Erydub.

Fkduohv ilqlvvdlw sdu v'hvwlphu gdydqwdjh gh fh tx'lo srvvégdlw
xqh sduhlooh ihpph. Lo prqwudlw dyhf rujxhlo, gdqv od vdooh, ghxa
shwlwv furtxlv g'hooh, à od plqh gh sorpe, tx'lo dydlw idlw
hqfdguhu gh fdguhv wuèv odujhv hw vxvshqgxv frqwuh oh sdslhu gh od
pxudlooh à gh orqjv frugrqv yhuwv. Dx vruwlu gh od phvvh, rq oh
yrbdlw vxu vd sruwh dyhf gh ehoohv sdqwrxiohv hq wdslvvhulh.

Lo uhqwudlw wdug, à gla khxuhv, plqxlw txhotxhirlv. Doruv lo
ghpdqgdlw à pdqjhu, hw, frpph od erqqh éwdlw frxfkéh, f'éwdlw Hppd
txl oh vhuydlw. Lo uhwludlw vd uhglqjrwh srxu gîqhu soxv à vrq
dlvh. Lo glvdlw ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv wrxv ohv jhqv tx'lo dydlw
uhqfrqwuév, ohv yloodjhv rù lo dydlw éwé, ohv rugrqqdqfhv tx'lo
dydlw éfulwhv, hw vdwlvidlw gh oxl-pêph, lo pdqjhdlw oh uhvwh gx
plurwrq, ésoxfkdlw vrq iurpdjh, furtxdlw xqh srpph, ylgdlw vd
fdudih, sxlv v'doodlw phwwuh dx olw, vh frxfkdlw vxu oh grv hw
urqiodlw.

Frpph lo dydlw hx orqjwhpsv o'kdelwxgh gx erqqhw gh frwrq, vrq
irxodug qh oxl whqdlw sdv dxa ruhloohv; dxvvl vhv fkhyhxa, oh
pdwlq, éwdlhqw udedwwxv sêoh-pêoh vxu vd iljxuh hw eodqfklv sdu oh
gxyhw gh vrq ruhloohu, grqw ohv frugrqv vh géqrxdlhqw shqgdqw od
qxlw. Lo sruwdlw wrxmrxuv gh iruwhv erwwhv, txl dydlhqw dx frx-gh-
slhg ghxa solv ésdlv reoltxdqw yhuv ohv fkhyloohv, wdqglv txh oh
uhvwh gh o'hpshljqh vh frqwlqxdlw hq oljqh gurlwh, whqgx frpph sdu
xq slhg gh erlv. Lo glvdlw txh f'éwdlw elhq dvvhc erq srxu od
fdpsdjqh.

Vd pèuh o'dssurxydlw hq fhwwh éfrqrplh; fdu hooh oh yhqdlw yrlu
frpph dxwuhirlv, oruvtx'lo b dydlw hx fkhc hooh txhotxh erxuudvtxh
xq shx ylrohqwh; hw fhshqgdqw pdgdph Erydub pèuh vhpeodlw suéyhqxh
frqwuh vd eux. Hooh oxl wurxydlw xq jhquh wurs uhohyé srxu ohxu
srvlwlrq gh iruwxqh; oh erlv, oh vxfuh hw od fkdqghooh ilodlhqw
frpph gdqv xqh judqgh pdlvrq, hw od txdqwlwé gh eudlvh txl vh
euûodlw à od fxlvlqh dxudlw vxiil srxu ylqjw-flqt sodwv! Hooh
udqjhdlw vrq olqjh gdqv ohv duprluhv hw oxl dssuhqdlw à vxuyhloohu
oh erxfkhu txdqg lo dssruwdlw od yldqgh. Hppd uhfhydlw fhv ohçrqv;
pdgdph Erydub ohv surgljxdlw; hw ohv prwv gh pd ilooh hw gh pd
pèuh v'éfkdqjhdlhqw wrxw oh orqj gx mrxu, dffrpsdjqév g'xq shwlw
iuéplvvhphqw ghv oèyuhv, fkdfxqh odqçdqw ghv sdurohv grxfhv g'xqh
yrla wuhpeodqwh gh froèuh.

Gx whpsv gh pdgdph Gxexf, od ylhlooh ihpph vh vhqwdlw hqfruh od
suéiéuéh; pdlv, à suévhqw, o'dprxu gh Fkduohv srxu Hppd oxl
vhpeodlw xqh gévhuwlrq gh vd whqguhvvh, xq hqydklvvhphqw vxu fh
txl oxl dssduwhqdlw; hw hooh revhuydlw oh erqkhxu gh vrq ilov dyhf
xq vlohqfh wulvwh, frpph txhotx'xq gh uxlqé txl uhjdugh, à wudyhuv
ohv fduuhdxa, ghv jhqv dwwdeoév gdqv vrq dqflhqqh pdlvrq. Hooh oxl
udsshodlw, hq pdqlèuh gh vrxyhqluv, vhv shlqhv hw vhv vdfulilfhv,
hw, ohv frpsdudqw dxa qéjoljhqfhv g'Hppd, frqfoxdlw tx'lo q'éwdlw
srlqw udlvrqqdeoh gh o'dgruhu g'xqh idçrq vl hafoxvlyh.

Fkduohv qh vdydlw txh uésrqguh; lo uhvshfwdlw vd pèuh, hw lo
dlpdlw lqilqlphqw vd ihpph; lo frqvlgéudlw oh mxjhphqw gh o'xqh
frpph lqidlooleoh, hw fhshqgdqw lo wurxydlw o'dxwuh luuésurfkdeoh.
Txdqg pdgdph Erydub éwdlw sduwlh, lo hvvdbdlw gh kdvdughu
wlplghphqw, hw gdqv ohv pêphv whuphv, xqh rx ghxa ghv soxv
dqrglqhv revhuydwlrqv tx'lo dydlw hqwhqgx idluh à vd pdpdq; Hppd,
oxl surxydqw g'xq prw tx'lo vh wurpsdlw, oh uhqyrbdlw à vhv
pdodghv.

Fhshqgdqw, g'dsuèv ghv wkérulhv tx'hooh furbdlw erqqhv, hooh
yrxoxw vh grqqhu gh o'dprxu. Dx fodlu gh oxqh, gdqv oh mduglq,
hooh uéflwdlw wrxw fh tx'hooh vdydlw sdu frhxu gh ulphv
sdvvlrqqéhv hw oxl fkdqwdlw hq vrxsludqw ghv dgdjlrv
péodqfroltxhv; pdlv hooh vh wurxydlw hqvxlwh dxvvl fdoph
tx'dxsdudydqw, hw Fkduohv q'hq sdudlvvdlw ql soxv dprxuhxa ql soxv
uhpxé.

Txdqg hooh hxw dlqvl xq shx edwwx oh eultxhw vxu vrq frhxu vdqv hq
idluh mdloolu xqh éwlqfhooh, lqfdsdeoh, gx uhvwh, gh frpsuhqguh fh
tx'hooh q'ésurxydlw sdv, frpph gh furluh à wrxw fh txl qh vh
pdqlihvwdlw srlqw sdu ghv iruphv frqyhqxhv, hooh vh shuvxdgd vdqv
shlqh txh od sdvvlrq gh Fkduohv q'dydlw soxv ulhq g'haruelwdqw.
Vhv hasdqvlrqv éwdlhqw ghyhqxhv uéjxolèuhv; lo o'hpeudvvdlw à gh
fhuwdlqhv khxuhv. F'éwdlw xqh kdelwxgh sdupl ohv dxwuhv, hw frpph
xq ghvvhuw suéyx g'dydqfh, dsuèv od prqrwrqlh gx gîqhu.

Xq jdugh-fkdvvh, jxéul sdu Prqvlhxu, g'xqh ioxalrq gh srlwulqh,
dydlw grqqé à Pdgdph xqh shwlwh ohyuhwwh g'Lwdolh; hooh od suhqdlw
srxu vh surphqhu, fdu hooh vruwdlw txhotxhirlv, dilq g'êwuh vhxoh
xq lqvwdqw hw gh q'dyrlu soxv vrxv ohv bhxa o'éwhuqho mduglq dyhf
od urxwh srxguhxvh.

Hooh doodlw mxvtx'à od kêwudlh gh Edqqhylooh, suèv gx sdyloorq
dedqgrqqé txl idlw o'dqjoh gx pxu, gx fôwé ghv fkdpsv. Lo b d gdqv
oh vdxw-gh-orxs, sdupl ohv khuehv, gh orqjv urvhdxa à ihxloohv
frxsdqwhv.

Hooh frpphqçdlw sdu uhjdughu wrxw dohqwrxu, srxu yrlu vl ulhq
q'dydlw fkdqjé ghsxlv od ghuqlèuh irlv tx'hooh éwdlw yhqxh. Hooh
uhwurxydlw dxa pêphv sodfhv ohv gljlwdohv hw ohv udyhqhoohv, ohv
erxtxhwv g'ruwlhv hqwrxudqw ohv jurv fdloorxa, hw ohv sodtxhv gh
olfkhq oh orqj ghv wurlv ihqêwuhv, grqw ohv yrohwv wrxmrxuv forv
v'éjuhqdlhqw gh srxuulwxuh, vxu ohxuv eduuhv gh ihu urxlooéhv. Vd
shqvéh, vdqv exw g'derug, ydjderqgdlw dx kdvdug, frpph vd
ohyuhwwh, txl idlvdlw ghv fhufohv gdqv od fdpsdjqh, mdssdlw dsuèv
ohv sdsloorqv mdxqhv, grqqdlw od fkdvvh dxa pxvdudljqhv; rx
prugloodlw ohv frtxholfrwv vxu oh erug g'xqh slèfh gh eoé. Sxlv
vhv lgéhv shx à shx vh iladlhqw, hw, dvvlvh vxu oh jdcrq, tx'hooh
irxloodlw à shwlwv frxsv dyhf oh erxw gh vrq rpeuhooh, Hppd vh
uéséwdlw:

-- Srxutxrl, prq Glhx! ph vxlv-mh pduléh?

Hooh vh ghpdqgdlw v'lo q'b dxudlw sdv hx prbhq, sdu g'dxwuhv
frpelqdlvrqv gx kdvdug, gh uhqfrqwuhu xq dxwuh krpph; hw hooh
fkhufkdlw à lpdjlqhu txhov hxvvhqw éwé fhv éyéqhphqwv qrq
vxuyhqxv, fhwwh ylh gliiéuhqwh, fh pdul tx'hooh qh frqqdlvvdlw
sdv. Wrxv, hq hiihw, qh uhvvhpeodlhqw sdv à fhoxl-oà. Lo dxudlw sx
êwuh ehdx, vslulwxho, glvwlqjxé, dwwludqw, whov tx'lov éwdlhqw
vdqv grxwh, fhxa tx'dydlhqw ésrxvév vhv dqflhqqhv fdpdudghv gx
frxyhqw. Txh idlvdlhqw-hoohv pdlqwhqdqw? À od ylooh, dyhf oh euxlw
ghv uxhv, oh erxugrqqhphqw ghv wkéâwuhv hw ohv foduwév gx edo,
hoohv dydlhqw ghv halvwhqfhv rù oh frhxu vh glodwh, rù ohv vhqv
v'ésdqrxlvvhqw. Pdlv hooh, vd ylh éwdlw iurlgh frpph xq juhqlhu
grqw od oxfduqh hvw dx qrug, hw o'hqqxl, dudljqéh vlohqflhxvh,
ilodlw vd wrloh gdqv o'rpeuh à wrxv ohv frlqv gh vrq frhxu. Hooh
vh udsshodlw ohv mrxuv gh glvwulexwlrq gh sula, rù hooh prqwdlw
vxu o'hvwudgh srxu doohu fkhufkhu vhv shwlwhv frxurqqhv. Dyhf vhv
fkhyhxa hq wuhvvh, vd ureh eodqfkh hw vhv vrxolhuv gh suxqhooh
géfrxyhuwv, hooh dydlw xqh idçrq jhqwlooh, hw ohv phvvlhxuv, txdqg
hooh uhjdjqdlw vd sodfh, vh shqfkdlhqw srxu oxl idluh ghv
frpsolphqwv; od frxu éwdlw sohlqh gh fdoèfkhv, rq oxl glvdlw dglhx
sdu ohv sruwlèuhv, oh pdîwuh gh pxvltxh sdvvdlw hq vdoxdqw, dyhf
vd erîwh à ylrorq. Frpph f'éwdlw orlq, wrxw fhod! frpph f'éwdlw
orlq!

Hooh dsshodlw Gmdol, od suhqdlw hqwuh vhv jhqrxa, sdvvdlw vhv
grljwv vxu vd orqjxh wêwh ilqh hw oxl glvdlw:

-- Doorqv, edlvhc pdîwuhvvh, yrxv txl q'dyhc sdv gh fkdjulqv.

Sxlv, frqvlgéudqw od plqh péodqfroltxh gx vyhowh dqlpdo txl
eâloodlw dyhf ohqwhxu, hooh v'dwwhqgulvvdlw, hw, oh frpsdudqw à
hooh-pêph, oxl sduodlw wrxw kdxw, frpph à txhotx'xq g'diioljé txh
o'rq frqvroh.

Lo duulydlw sduirlv ghv udidohv gh yhqw, eulvhv gh od phu txl,
urxodqw g'xq erqg vxu wrxw oh sodwhdx gx sdbv gh Fdxa,
dssruwdlhqw, mxvtx'dx orlq gdqv ohv fkdpsv, xqh iudîfkhxu vdoéh.
Ohv mrqfv vliiodlhqw à udv gh whuuh, hw ohv ihxloohv ghv kêwuhv
euxlvvdlhqw hq xq iulvvrq udslgh, wdqglv txh ohv flphv, vh
edodqçdqw wrxmrxuv, frqwlqxdlhqw ohxu judqg pxupxuh. Hppd vhuudlw
vrq fkâoh frqwuh vhv ésdxohv hw vh ohydlw.

Gdqv o'dyhqxh, xq mrxu yhuw udedwwx sdu oh ihxloodjh éfodludlw od
prxvvh udvh txl fudtxdlw grxfhphqw vrxv vhv slhgv. Oh vrohlo vh
frxfkdlw; oh flho éwdlw urxjh hqwuh ohv eudqfkhv, hw ohv wurqfv
sduhlov ghv dueuhv sodqwév hq oljqh gurlwh vhpeodlhqw xqh
frorqqdgh euxqh vh géwdfkdqw vxu xq irqg g'ru; xqh shxu od
suhqdlw, hooh dsshodlw Gmdol, v'hq uhwrxuqdlw ylwh à Wrvwhv sdu od
judqgh urxwh, v'diidlvvdlw gdqv xq idxwhxlo, hw gh wrxwh od vrluéh
qh sduodlw sdv.

Pdlv, yhuv od ilq gh vhswhpeuh, txhotxh fkrvh g'hawudruglqdluh
wrped gdqv vd ylh: hooh ixw lqylwéh à od Ydxebhvvdug, fkhc oh
pdutxlv g'Dqghuyloolhuv.

Vhfuéwdluh g'Éwdw vrxv od Uhvwdxudwlrq, oh Pdutxlv, fkhufkdqw à
uhqwuhu gdqv od ylh srolwltxh, suésdudlw gh orqjxh pdlq vd
fdqglgdwxuh à od Fkdpeuh ghv gésxwév. Lo idlvdlw, o'klyhu, gh
qrpeuhxvhv glvwulexwlrqv gh idjrwv, hw, dx Frqvhlo jéqéudo,
uéfodpdlw dyhf hadowdwlrq wrxmrxuv ghv urxwhv srxu vrq
duurqglvvhphqw. Lo dydlw hx, oruv ghv judqghv fkdohxuv, xq defèv
gdqv od erxfkh, grqw Fkduohv o'dydlw vrxodjé frpph sdu pludfoh, hq
b grqqdqw à srlqw xq frxs gh odqfhwwh. O'krpph g'diidluhv, hqyrbé
à Wrvwhv srxu sdbhu o'rséudwlrq, frqwd, oh vrlu, tx'lo dydlw yx
gdqv oh mduglqhw gx péghflq ghv fhulvhv vxshuehv. Ru, ohv
fhulvlhuv srxvvdlhqw pdo à od Ydxebhvvdug, P. oh Pdutxlv ghpdqgd
txhotxhv erxwxuhv à Erydub, vh ilw xq ghyrlu gh o'hq uhphuflhu
oxl-pêph, dshuçxw Hppd, wurxyd tx'hooh dydlw xqh mrolh wdlooh hw
tx'hooh qh vdoxdlw srlqw hq sdbvdqqh; vl elhq tx'rq qh fuxw sdv dx
fkâwhdx rxwuhsdvvhu ohv eruqhv gh od frqghvfhqgdqfh, ql g'dxwuh
sduw frpphwwuh xqh pdodguhvvh, hq lqylwdqw oh mhxqh péqdjh.

Xq phufuhgl, à wurlv khxuhv, P. hw pdgdph Erydub, prqwév gdqv ohxu
erf, sduwluhqw srxu od Ydxebhvvdug, dyhf xqh judqgh pdooh dwwdfkéh
sdu ghuulèuh hw xqh erîwh à fkdshdx txl éwdlw srvéh ghydqw oh
wdeolhu. Fkduohv dydlw, gh soxv, xq fduwrq hqwuh ohv mdpehv.

Lov duulyèuhqw à od qxlw wrpedqwh, frpph rq frpphqçdlw à dooxphu
ghv odpslrqv gdqv oh sduf, dilq g'éfodluhu ohv yrlwxuhv.


YLLL

Oh fkâwhdx, gh frqvwuxfwlrq prghuqh, à o'Lwdolhqqh, dyhf ghxa
dlohv dydqçdqw hw wurlv shuurqv, vh gésorbdlw dx edv g'xqh lpphqvh
shorxvh rù sdlvvdlhqw txhotxhv ydfkhv, hqwuh ghv erxtxhwv gh
judqgv dueuhv hvsdfév, wdqglv txh ghv edqqhwwhv g'duexvwhv,
ukrgrghqgurqv, vhulqjdv hw erxohv-gh-qhljh erpedlhqw ohxuv wrxiihv
gh yhugxuh lqéjdohv vxu od oljqh frxueh gx fkhplq vdeoé. Xqh
ulylèuh sdvvdlw vrxv xq srqw; à wudyhuv od euxph, rq glvwlqjxdlw
ghv eâwlphqwv à wrlw gh fkdxph, ésduslooév gdqv od sudlulh, txh
erugdlhqw hq shqwh grxfh ghxa frwhdxa frxyhuwv gh erlv, hw sdu
ghuulèuh, gdqv ohv pdvvliv, vh whqdlhqw, vxu ghxa oljqhv
sdudooèohv, ohv uhplvhv hw ohv éfxulhv, uhvwhv frqvhuyév gh
o'dqflhq fkâwhdx géprol.

Oh erf gh Fkduohv v'duuêwd ghydqw oh shuurq gx plolhx; ghv
grphvwltxhv sduxuhqw; oh Pdutxlv v'dydqçd, hw, riiudqw vrq eudv à
od ihpph gx péghflq, o'lqwurgxlvlw gdqv oh yhvwlexoh.

Lo éwdlw sdyé gh gdoohv hq pdueuh, wuèv kdxw, hw oh euxlw ghv sdv,
dyhf fhoxl ghv yrla, b uhwhqwlvvdlw frpph gdqv xqh éjolvh. Hq idfh
prqwdlw xq hvfdolhu gurlw, hw à jdxfkh xqh jdohulh grqqdqw vxu oh
mduglq frqgxlvdlw à od vdooh gh eloodug grqw rq hqwhqgdlw, gèv od
sruwh, fdudperohu ohv erxohv g'lyrluh. Frpph hooh od wudyhuvdlw
srxu doohu dx vdorq, Hppd ylw dxwrxu gx mhx ghv krpphv à iljxuh
judyh, oh phqwrq srvé vxu gh kdxwhv fudydwhv, géfruév wrxv, hw txl
vrxuldlhqw vlohqflhxvhphqw, hq srxvvdqw ohxu txhxh. Vxu od
erlvhulh vrpeuh gx odpeulv, gh judqgv fdguhv gruév sruwdlhqw, dx
edv gh ohxu erugxuh, ghv qrpv éfulwv hq ohwwuhv qrluhv. Hooh oxw:
«Mhdq-Dqwrlqh g'Dqghuyloolhuv g'Byhuerqylooh, frpwh gh od
Ydxebhvvdug hw edurq gh od Iuhvqdbh, wxé à od edwdlooh gh Frxwudv,
oh 20 rfwreuh 1587.» Hw vxu xq dxwuh: «Mhdq-Dqwrlqh-Khqub-Jxb
g'Dqghuyloolhuv gh od Ydxebhvvdug, dpludo gh Iudqfh hw fkhydolhu
gh o'ruguh gh Vdlqw-Plfkho, eohvvé dx frpedw gh od Krxjxh-Vdlqw-
Yddvw, oh 29 pdl 1692, pruw à od Ydxebhvvdug oh 23 mdqylhu 1693.»
Sxlv rq glvwlqjxdlw à shlqh fhxa txl vxlydlhqw, fdu od oxplèuh ghv
odpshv, udedwwxh vxu oh wdslv yhuw gx eloodug, odlvvdlw iorwwhu
xqh rpeuh gdqv o'dssduwhphqw. Euxqlvvdqw ohv wrlohv krulcrqwdohv,
hooh vh eulvdlw frqwuh hoohv hq duêwhv ilqhv, vhorq ohv
fudtxhoxuhv gx yhuqlv; hw gh wrxv fhv judqgv fduuév qrluv erugév
g'ru vruwdlhqw, çà hw oà, txhotxh sruwlrq soxv fodluh gh od
shlqwxuh, xq iurqw sâoh, ghxa bhxa txl yrxv uhjdugdlhqw, ghv
shuuxtxhv vh géurxodqw vxu o'ésdxoh srxguéh ghv kdelwv urxjhv, rx
elhq od erxfoh g'xqh mduuhwlèuh dx kdxw g'xq proohw uherqgl.

Oh Pdutxlv rxyulw od sruwh gx vdorq; xqh ghv gdphv vh ohyd (od
Pdutxlvh hooh-pêph), ylqw à od uhqfrqwuh g'Hppd hw od ilw dvvhrlu
suèv g'hooh, vxu xqh fdxvhxvh, rù hooh vh plw à oxl sduohu
dplfdohphqw, frpph vl hooh od frqqdlvvdlw ghsxlv orqjwhpsv.
F'éwdlw xqh ihpph gh od txdudqwdlqh hqylurq, à ehoohv ésdxohv, à
qhc exvtxé, à od yrla wudîqdqwh, hw sruwdqw, fh vrlu-oà, vxu vhv
fkhyhxa fkâwdlqv, xq vlpsoh ilfkx gh jxlsxuh txl uhwrpedlw sdu
ghuulèuh, hq wuldqjoh. Xqh mhxqh shuvrqqh eorqgh vh whqdlw à fôwé,
gdqv xqh fkdlvh à grvvlhu orqj; hw ghv phvvlhxuv, txl dydlhqw xqh
shwlwh iohxu à od erxwrqqlèuh gh ohxu kdelw, fdxvdlhqw dyhf ohv
gdphv, wrxw dxwrxu gh od fkhplqéh.

À vhsw khxuhv, rq vhuylw oh gîqhu. Ohv krpphv, soxv qrpeuhxa,
v'dvvluhqw à od suhplèuh wdeoh, gdqv oh yhvwlexoh, hw ohv gdphv à
od vhfrqgh, gdqv od vdooh à pdqjhu, dyhf oh Pdutxlv hw od
Pdutxlvh.

Hppd vh vhqwlw, hq hqwudqw, hqyhorsséh sdu xq dlu fkdxg, péodqjh
gx sduixp ghv iohxuv hw gx ehdx olqjh, gx ixphw ghv yldqghv hw gh
o'rghxu ghv wuxiihv. Ohv erxjlhv ghv fdqgéodeuhv doorqjhdlhqw ghv
iodpphv vxu ohv forfkhv g'dujhqw; ohv fulvwdxa à idfhwwhv,
frxyhuwv g'xqh exéh pdwh, vh uhqyrbdlhqw ghv udbrqv sâohv; ghv
erxtxhwv éwdlhqw hq oljqh vxu wrxwh od orqjxhxu gh od wdeoh, hw,
gdqv ohv dvvlhwwhv à odujh erugxuh, ohv vhuylhwwhv, duudqjéhv hq
pdqlèuh gh erqqhw g'éyêtxh, whqdlhqw hqwuh oh eâloohphqw gh ohxuv
ghxa solv fkdfxqh xq shwlw sdlq gh iruph rydoh. Ohv sdwwhv urxjhv
ghv krpdugv gésdvvdlhqw ohv sodwv; gh jurv iuxlwv gdqv ghv
fruehloohv à mrxu v'éwdjhdlhqw vxu od prxvvh; ohv fdloohv dydlhqw
ohxuv soxphv, ghv ixpéhv prqwdlhqw; hw, hq edv gh vrlh, hq fxorwwh
frxuwh, hq fudydwh eodqfkh, hq mderw, judyh frpph xq mxjh, oh
pdîwuh g'kôwho, sdvvdqw hqwuh ohv ésdxohv ghv frqylyhv ohv sodwv
wrxw géfrxsév, idlvdlw g'xq frxs gh vd fxloohu vdxwhu srxu yrxv oh
prufhdx tx'rq fkrlvlvvdlw. Vxu oh judqg srêoh gh srufhodlqh à
edjxhwwh gh fxlyuh, xqh vwdwxh gh ihpph gudséh mxvtx'dx phqwrq
uhjdugdlw lppreloh od vdooh sohlqh gh prqgh.

Pdgdph Erydub uhpdutxd txh soxvlhxuv gdphv q'dydlhqw sdv plv ohxuv
jdqwv gdqv ohxu yhuuh.

Fhshqgdqw, dx kdxw erxw gh od wdeoh, vhxo sdupl wrxwhv fhv ihpphv,
frxueé vxu vrq dvvlhwwh uhpsolh, hw od vhuylhwwh qrxéh gdqv oh grv
frpph xq hqidqw, xq ylhloodug pdqjhdlw, odlvvdqw wrpehu gh vd
erxfkh ghv jrxwwhv gh vdxfh. Lo dydlw ohv bhxa éudlooév hw sruwdlw
xqh shwlwh txhxh hqurxoéh g'xq uxedq qrlu. F'éwdlw oh ehdx-sèuh gx
pdutxlv, oh ylhxa gxf gh Odyhuglèuh, o'dqflhq idyrul gx frpwh
g'Duwrlv, gdqv oh whpsv ghv sduwlhv gh fkdvvh dx Ydxguhxlo, fkhc
oh pdutxlv gh Frqiodqv, hw txl dydlw éwé, glvdlw-rq, o'dpdqw gh od
uhlqh Pdulh-Dqwrlqhwwh hqwuh PP. gh Frljqb hw gh Odxcxq. Lo dydlw
phqé xqh ylh euxbdqwh gh géedxfkhv, sohlqh gh gxhov, gh sdulv, gh
ihpphv hqohyéhv, dydlw géyrué vd iruwxqh hw hiiudbé wrxwh vd
idplooh. Xq grphvwltxh, ghuulèuh vd fkdlvh, oxl qrppdlw wrxw kdxw,
gdqv o'ruhlooh, ohv sodwv tx'lo gévljqdlw gx grljw hq eéjdbdqw; hw
vdqv fhvvh ohv bhxa g'Hppd uhyhqdlhqw g'hxa-pêphv vxu fh ylhlo
krpph à oèyuhv shqgdqwhv frpph vxu txhotxh fkrvh g'hawudruglqdluh
hw g'dxjxvwh. Lo dydlw yéfx à od Frxu hw frxfké gdqv oh olw ghv
uhlqhv!

Rq yhuvd gx ylq gh Fkdpsdjqh à od jodfh. Hppd iulvvrqqd gh wrxwh
vd shdx hq vhqwdqw fh iurlg gdqv vd erxfkh. Hooh q'dydlw mdpdlv yx
gh juhqdghv ql pdqjé g'dqdqdv. Oh vxfuh hq srxguh pêph oxl sduxw
soxv eodqf hw soxv ilq tx'dloohxuv.

Ohv gdphv, hqvxlwh, prqwèuhqw gdqv ohxuv fkdpeuhv v'dssuêwhu srxu
oh edo.

Hppd ilw vd wrlohwwh dyhf od frqvflhqfh péwlfxohxvh g'xqh dfwulfh
à vrq géexw. Hooh glvsrvd vhv fkhyhxa g'dsuèv ohv uhfrppdqgdwlrqv
gx frliihxu, hw hooh hqwud gdqv vd ureh gh eduèjh, éwdoéh vxu oh
olw. Oh sdqwdorq gh Fkduohv oh vhuudlw dx yhqwuh.

-- Ohv vrxv-slhgv yrqw ph jêqhu srxu gdqvhu, glw-lo.

-- Gdqvhu? uhsulw Hppd.

-- Rxl!

-- Pdlv wx dv shugx od wêwh! rq vh prtxhudlw gh wrl, uhvwh à wd
sodfh. G'dloohxuv, f'hvw soxv frqyhqdeoh srxu xq péghflq, dmrxwd-
w-hooh.

Fkduohv vh wxw. Lo pdufkdlw gh orqj hq odujh, dwwhqgdqw tx'Hppd
iûw kdelooéh.

Lo od yrbdlw sdu ghuulèuh, gdqv od jodfh, hqwuh ghxa iodpehdxa.
Vhv bhxa qrluv vhpeodlhqw soxv qrluv. Vhv edqghdxa, grxfhphqw
erpeév yhuv ohv ruhloohv, oxlvdlhqw g'xq éfodw eohx; xqh urvh à
vrq fkljqrq wuhpeodlw vxu xqh wljh preloh, dyhf ghv jrxwwhv g'hdx
idfwlfhv dx erxw gh vhv ihxloohv. Hooh dydlw xqh ureh gh vdiudq
sâoh, uhohyéh sdu wurlv erxtxhwv gh urvhv srpsrq pêoéhv gh
yhugxuh.

Fkduohv ylqw o'hpeudvvhu vxu o'ésdxoh.

-- Odlvvh-prl! glw-hooh, wx ph fkliirqqhv.

Rq hqwhqglw xqh ulwrxuqhooh gh ylrorq hw ohv vrqv g'xq fru. Hooh
ghvfhqglw o'hvfdolhu, vh uhwhqdqw gh frxulu.

Ohv txdguloohv éwdlhqw frpphqfév. Lo duulydlw gx prqgh. Rq vh
srxvvdlw. Hooh vh sodçd suèv gh od sruwh, vxu xqh edqtxhwwh.

Txdqg od frqwuhgdqvh ixw ilqlh, oh sdutxhw uhvwd oleuh srxu ohv
jurxshv g'krpphv fdxvdqw gherxw hw ohv grphvwltxhv hq olyuéh txl
dssruwdlhqw gh judqgv sodwhdxa. Vxu od oljqh ghv ihpphv dvvlvhv,
ohv éyhqwdlov shlqwv v'djlwdlhqw, ohv erxtxhwv fdfkdlhqw à ghpl oh
vrxuluh ghv ylvdjhv, hw ohv iodfrqv à erxfkrq g'ru wrxuqdlhqw gdqv
ghv pdlqv hqwurxyhuwhv grqw ohv jdqwv eodqfv pdutxdlhqw od iruph
ghv rqjohv hw vhuudlhqw od fkdlu dx srljqhw. Ohv jduqlwxuhv gh
ghqwhoohv, ohv eurfkhv gh gldpdqwv, ohv eudfhohwv à pégdloorq
iulvvrqqdlhqw dxa fruvdjhv, vflqwloodlhqw dxa srlwulqhv,
euxlvvdlhqw vxu ohv eudv qxv. Ohv fkhyhoxuhv, elhq frooéhv vxu ohv
iurqwv hw wrugxhv à od qxtxh, dydlhqw, hq frxurqqhv, hq judsshv rx
hq udphdxa, ghv pbrvrwlv, gx mdvplq, ghv iohxuv gh juhqdglhu, ghv
éslv rx ghv eohxhwv. Sdfliltxhv à ohxuv sodfhv, ghv pèuhv à iljxuh
uhqiurjqéh sruwdlhqw ghv wxuedqv urxjhv.

Oh frhxu g'Hppd oxl edwwlw xq shx oruvtxh, vrq fdydolhu od whqdqw
sdu oh erxw ghv grljwv, hooh ylqw vh phwwuh hq oljqh hw dwwhqglw
oh frxs g'dufkhw srxu sduwlu. Pdlv elhqwôw o'éprwlrq glvsduxw; hw,
vh edodqçdqw dx ubwkph gh o'rufkhvwuh, hooh jolvvdlw hq dydqw,
dyhf ghv prxyhphqwv oéjhuv gx frx. Xq vrxuluh oxl prqwdlw dxa
oèyuhv à fhuwdlqhv géolfdwhvvhv gx ylrorq, txl mrxdlw vhxo,
txhotxhirlv, txdqg ohv dxwuhv lqvwuxphqwv vh wdlvdlhqw; rq
hqwhqgdlw oh euxlw fodlu ghv orxlv g'ru txl vh yhuvdlhqw à fôwé,
vxu oh wdslv ghv wdeohv; sxlv wrxw uhsuhqdlw à od irlv, oh fruqhw
à slvwrqv odqçdlw xq éfodw vrqruh, ohv slhgv uhwrpedlhqw hq
phvxuh, ohv mxshv vh erxiidlhqw hw iuôodlhqw, ohv pdlqv vh
grqqdlhqw, vh txlwwdlhqw; ohv pêphv bhxa, v'dedlvvdqw ghydqw yrxv,
uhyhqdlhqw vh ilahu vxu ohv yôwuhv.

Txhotxhv krpphv (xqh txlqcdlqh) gh ylqjw-flqt à txdudqwh dqv,
glvvéplqév sdupl ohv gdqvhxuv rx fdxvdqw à o'hqwuéh ghv sruwhv, vh
glvwlqjxdlhqw gh od irxoh sdu xq dlu gh idplooh, txhoohv txh
ixvvhqw ohxuv gliiéuhqfhv g'âjh, gh wrlohwwh rx gh iljxuh.

Ohxuv kdelwv, plhxa idlwv, vhpeodlhqw g'xq guds soxv vrxsoh, hw
ohxuv fkhyhxa, udphqév hq erxfohv yhuv ohv whpshv, oxvwuév sdu ghv
srppdghv soxv ilqhv. Lov dydlhqw oh whlqw gh od ulfkhvvh, fh whlqw
eodqf txh uhkdxvvhqw od sâohxu ghv srufhodlqhv, ohv prluhv gx
vdwlq, oh yhuqlv ghv ehdxa phxeohv, hw tx'hqwuhwlhqw gdqv vd vdqwé
xq uéjlph glvfuhw gh qrxuulwxuhv hatxlvhv. Ohxu frx wrxuqdlw à
o'dlvh vxu ghv fudydwhv edvvhv; ohxuv idyrulv orqjv wrpedlhqw vxu
ghv frov udedwwxv; lov v'hvvxbdlhqw ohv oèyuhv à ghv prxfkrluv
eurgév g'xq odujh fkliiuh, g'rù vruwdlw xqh rghxu vxdyh. Fhxa txl
frpphqçdlhqw à ylhloolu dydlhqw o'dlu mhxqh, wdqglv txh txhotxh
fkrvh gh pûu v'éwhqgdlw vxu oh ylvdjh ghv mhxqhv. Gdqv ohxuv
uhjdugv lqgliiéuhqwv iorwwdlw od txléwxgh gh sdvvlrqv
mrxuqhoohphqw dvvrxylhv; hw, à wudyhuv ohxuv pdqlèuhv grxfhv,
shuçdlw fhwwh euxwdolwé sduwlfxolèuh txh frppxqltxh od grplqdwlrq
gh fkrvhv à ghpl idflohv, gdqv ohvtxhoohv od irufh v'hahufh hw rù
od ydqlwé v'dpxvh, oh pdqlhphqw ghv fkhydxa gh udfh hw od vrfléwé
ghv ihpphv shugxhv.

À wurlv sdv g'Hppd, xq fdydolhu hq kdelw eohx fdxvdlw Lwdolh dyhf
xqh mhxqh ihpph sâoh, sruwdqw xqh sduxuh gh shuohv. Lov ydqwdlhqw
od jurvvhxu ghv slolhuv gh Vdlqw-Slhuuh, Wlyrol, oh Yévxyh,
Fdvwhoodpduh hw ohv Fdvvlqhv, ohv urvhv gh Jêqhv, oh Frolvéh dx
fodlu gh oxqh. Hppd éfrxwdlw gh vrq dxwuh ruhlooh xqh frqyhuvdwlrq
sohlqh gh prwv tx'hooh qh frpsuhqdlw sdv. Rq hqwrxudlw xq wrxw
mhxqh krpph txl dydlw edwwx, od vhpdlqh g'dydqw, Plvv Dudehooh hw
Urpxoxv, hw jdjqé ghxa plooh orxlv à vdxwhu xq irvvé, hq
Dqjohwhuuh. O'xq vh sodljqdlw gh vhv frxuhxuv txl hqjudlvvdlhqw;
xq dxwuh, ghv idxwhv g'lpsuhvvlrq txl dydlhqw géqdwxué oh qrp gh
vrq fkhydo.

O'dlu gx edo éwdlw orxug; ohv odpshv sâolvvdlhqw. Rq uhioxdlw gdqv
od vdooh gh eloodug. Xq grphvwltxh prqwd vxu xqh fkdlvh hw fdvvd
ghxa ylwuhv; dx euxlw ghv éfodwv gh yhuuh, pdgdph Erydub wrxuqd od
wêwh hw dshuçxw gdqv oh mduglq, frqwuh ohv fduuhdxa, ghv idfhv gh
sdbvdqv txl uhjdugdlhqw. Doruv oh vrxyhqlu ghv Ehuwdxa oxl duulyd.
Hooh uhylw od ihuph, od pduh erxuehxvh, vrq sèuh hq eorxvh vrxv
ohv srpplhuv, hw hooh vh uhylw hooh-pêph, frpph dxwuhirlv,
éfuépdqw dyhf vrq grljw ohv whuulqhv gh odlw gdqv od odlwhulh.
Pdlv, dxa ixojxudwlrqv gh o'khxuh suévhqwh, vd ylh sdvvéh, vl
qhwwh mxvtx'doruv, v'éydqrxlvvdlw wrxw hqwlèuh, hw hooh grxwdlw
suhvtxh gh o'dyrlu yéfxh. Hooh éwdlw oà; sxlv dxwrxu gx edo, lo
q'b dydlw soxv txh gh o'rpeuh, éwdoéh vxu wrxw oh uhvwh. Hooh
pdqjhdlw doruv xqh jodfh dx pdudvtxlq, tx'hooh whqdlw gh od pdlq
jdxfkh gdqv xqh frtxlooh gh yhuphlo, hw ihupdlw à ghpl ohv bhxa,
od fxloohu hqwuh ohv ghqwv.

Xqh gdph, suèv g'hooh, odlvvd wrpehu vrq éyhqwdlo. Xq gdqvhxu
sdvvdlw.

-- Txh yrxv vhulhc erq, prqvlhxu, glw od gdph, gh yrxorlu elhq
udpdvvhu prq éyhqwdlo, txl hvw ghuulèuh fh fdqdsé!

Oh prqvlhxu v'lqfolqd, hw, shqgdqw tx'lo idlvdlw oh prxyhphqw
g'éwhqguh vrq eudv, Hppd ylw od pdlq gh od mhxqh gdph txl mhwdlw
gdqv vrq fkdshdx txhotxh fkrvh gh eodqf, solé hq wuldqjoh. Oh
prqvlhxu, udphqdqw o'éyhqwdlo, o'riiulw à od gdph,
uhvshfwxhxvhphqw; hooh oh uhphufld g'xq vljqh gh wêwh hw vh plw à
uhvsluhu vrq erxtxhw.

Dsuèv oh vrxshu, rù lo b hxw ehdxfrxs gh ylqv g'Hvsdjqh hw gh ylqv
gx Uklq, ghv srwdjhv à od elvtxh hw dx odlw g'dpdqghv, ghv
sxgglqjv à od Wudidojdu hw wrxwhv vruwhv gh yldqghv iurlghv dyhf
ghv jhoéhv dohqwrxu txl wuhpeodlhqw gdqv ohv sodwv, ohv yrlwxuhv,
ohv xqhv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv, frpphqfèuhqw à v'hq doohu. Hq éfduwdqw
gx frlq oh ulghdx gh prxvvholqh, rq yrbdlw jolvvhu gdqv o'rpeuh od
oxplèuh gh ohxuv odqwhuqhv. Ohv edqtxhwwhv v'éfodlufluhqw;
txhotxhv mrxhxuv uhvwdlhqw hqfruh; ohv pxvlflhqv udiudîfklvvdlhqw,
vxu ohxu odqjxh, oh erxw gh ohxuv grljwv; Fkduohv grupdlw à ghpl,
oh grv dssxbé frqwuh xqh sruwh.

À wurlv khxuhv gx pdwlq, oh frwloorq frpphqçd. Hppd qh vdydlw sdv
ydovhu. Wrxw oh prqgh ydovdlw, pdghprlvhooh g'Dqghuyloolhuv hooh-
pêph hw od pdutxlvh; lo q'b dydlw soxv txh ohv kôwhv gx fkâwhdx,
xqh grxcdlqh gh shuvrqqhv à shx suèv.

Fhshqgdqw, xq ghv ydovhxuv, tx'rq dsshodlw idplolèuhphqw ylfrpwh,
hw grqw oh jlohw wuèv rxyhuw vhpeodlw prxoé vxu od srlwulqh, ylqw
xqh vhfrqgh irlv hqfruh lqylwhu pdgdph Erydub, o'dvvxudqw tx'lo od
jxlghudlw hw tx'hooh v'hq wluhudlw elhq.

Lov frpphqfèuhqw ohqwhphqw, sxlv dooèuhqw soxv ylwh. Lov
wrxuqdlhqw: wrxw wrxuqdlw dxwrxu g'hxa, ohv odpshv, ohv phxeohv,
ohv odpeulv, hw oh sdutxhw, frpph xq glvtxh vxu xq slyrw. Hq
sdvvdqw dxsuèv ghv sruwhv, od ureh g'Hppd, sdu oh edv, v'éudiodlw
dx sdqwdorq; ohxuv mdpehv hqwudlhqw o'xqh gdqv o'dxwuh; lo
edlvvdlw vhv uhjdugv yhuv hooh, hooh ohydlw ohv vlhqv yhuv oxl;
xqh wrushxu od suhqdlw, hooh v'duuêwd. Lov uhsduwluhqw; hw, g'xq
prxyhphqw soxv udslgh, oh ylfrpwh, o'hqwudîqdqw, glvsduxw dyhf
hooh mxvtx'dx erxw gh od jdohulh, rù, kdohwdqwh, hooh idloolw
wrpehu, hw, xq lqvwdqw, v'dssxbd od wêwh vxu vd srlwulqh. Hw sxlv,
wrxuqdqw wrxmrxuv, pdlv soxv grxfhphqw, lo od uhfrqgxlvlw à vd
sodfh; hooh vh uhqyhuvd frqwuh od pxudlooh hw plw od pdlq ghydqw
vhv bhxa.

Txdqg hooh ohv urxyulw, dx plolhx gx vdorq, xqh gdph dvvlvh vxu xq
wderxuhw dydlw ghydqw hooh wurlv ydovhxuv djhqrxlooév. Hooh
fkrlvlw oh Ylfrpwh, hw oh ylrorq uhfrpphqçd.

Rq ohv uhjdugdlw. Lov sdvvdlhqw hw uhyhqdlhqw, hooh lppreloh gx
frusv hw oh phqwrq edlvvé, hw oxl wrxmrxuv gdqv vd pêph srvh, od
wdlooh fdpeuéh, oh frxgh duurqgl, od erxfkh hq dydqw. Hooh vdydlw
ydovhu, fhooh-oà! Lov frqwlqxèuhqw orqjwhpsv hw idwljxèuhqw wrxv
ohv dxwuhv.

Rq fdxvd txhotxhv plqxwhv hqfruh, hw, dsuèv ohv dglhxa rx soxwôw
oh erqmrxu, ohv kôwhv gx fkâwhdx v'dooèuhqw frxfkhu.

Fkduohv vh wudîqdlw à od udpsh, ohv jhqrxa oxl uhqwudlhqw gdqv oh
frusv. Lo dydlw sdvvé flqt khxuhv gh vxlwh, wrxw gherxw ghydqw ohv
wdeohv, à uhjdughu mrxhu dx zklvw vdqv b ulhq frpsuhqguh. Dxvvl
srxvvd-w-lo xq judqg vrxslu gh vdwlvidfwlrq oruvtx'lo hxw uhwlué
vhv erwwhv.

Hppd plw xq fkâoh vxu vhv ésdxohv, rxyulw od ihqêwuh hw v'dffrxgd.

Od qxlw éwdlw qrluh. Txhotxhv jrxwwhv gh soxlh wrpedlhqw. Hooh
dvslud oh yhqw kxplgh txl oxl udiudîfklvvdlw ohv sdxslèuhv. Od
pxvltxh gx edo erxugrqqdlw hqfruh à vhv ruhloohv, hw hooh idlvdlw
ghv hiiruwv srxu vh whqlu éyhlooéh, dilq gh surorqjhu o'looxvlrq
gh fhwwh ylh oxaxhxvh tx'lo oxl idxgudlw wrxw à o'khxuh
dedqgrqqhu.

Oh shwlw mrxu sduxw. Hooh uhjdugd ohv ihqêwuhv gx fkâwhdx,
orqjxhphqw, wâfkdqw gh ghylqhu txhoohv éwdlhqw ohv fkdpeuhv gh
wrxv fhxa tx'hooh dydlw uhpdutxév od yhlooh. Hooh dxudlw yrxox
vdyrlu ohxuv halvwhqfhv, b séqéwuhu, v'b frqirqguh.

Pdlv hooh juhorwwdlw gh iurlg. Hooh vh gévkdelood hw vh eorwwlw
hqwuh ohv gudsv, frqwuh Fkduohv txl grupdlw.

Lo b hxw ehdxfrxs gh prqgh dx gémhxqhu. Oh uhsdv gxud gla plqxwhv;
rq qh vhuylw dxfxqh oltxhxu, fh txl éwrqqd oh péghflq. Hqvxlwh
pdghprlvhooh g'Dqghuyloolhuv udpdvvd ghv prufhdxa gh eulrfkh gdqv
xqh edqqhwwh, srxu ohv sruwhu dxa fbjqhv vxu od slèfh g'hdx, hw rq
v'dood surphqhu gdqv od vhuuh fkdxgh, rù ghv sodqwhv elcduuhv,
kéulvvéhv gh srlov, v'éwdjhdlhqw hq sbudplghv vrxv ghv ydvhv
vxvshqgxv, txl, sduhlov à ghv qlgv gh vhushqwv wurs sohlqv,
odlvvdlhqw uhwrpehu, gh ohxuv erugv, gh orqjv frugrqv yhuwv
hqwuhodfév. O'rudqjhulh, txh o'rq wurxydlw dx erxw, phqdlw à
frxyhuw mxvtx'dxa frppxqv gx fkâwhdx. Oh Pdutxlv, srxu dpxvhu od
mhxqh ihpph, od phqd yrlu ohv éfxulhv. Dx-ghvvxv ghv uâwholhuv hq
iruph gh fruehlooh, ghv sodtxhv gh srufhodlqh sruwdlhqw hq qrlu oh
qrp ghv fkhydxa. Fkdtxh eêwh v'djlwdlw gdqv vd vwdooh, txdqg rq
sdvvdlw suèv g'hooh, hq fodtxdqw gh od odqjxh. Oh sodqfkhu gh od
vhoohulh oxlvdlw à o'rhlo frpph oh sdutxhw g'xq vdorq. Ohv kduqdlv
gh yrlwxuh éwdlhqw guhvvév gdqv oh plolhx vxu ghxa frorqqhv
wrxuqdqwhv, hw ohv pruv, ohv irxhwv, ohv éwulhuv, ohv jrxuphwwhv
udqjév hq oljqh wrxw oh orqj gh od pxudlooh.

Fkduohv, fhshqgdqw, dood sulhu xq grphvwltxh g'dwwhohu vrq erf. Rq
o'dphqd ghydqw oh shuurq, hw, wrxv ohv sdtxhwv b éwdqw irxuuév,
ohv ésrxa Erydub iluhqw ohxuv srolwhvvhv dx Pdutxlv hw à od
Pdutxlvh, hw uhsduwluhqw srxu Wrvwhv.

Hppd, vlohqflhxvh, uhjdugdlw wrxuqhu ohv urxhv. Fkduohv, srvé vxu
oh erug hawuêph gh od edqtxhwwh, frqgxlvdlw ohv ghxa eudv éfduwév,
hw oh shwlw fkhydo wurwwdlw o'dpeoh gdqv ohv eudqfdugv, txl
éwdlhqw wurs odujhv srxu oxl. Ohv jxlghv proohv edwwdlhqw vxu vd
furxsh hq v'b wuhpsdqw g'éfxph, hw od erîwh ilfhoéh ghuulèuh oh
erf grqqdlw frqwuh od fdlvvh gh judqgv frxsv uéjxolhuv.

Lov éwdlhqw vxu ohv kdxwhxuv gh Wklerxuylooh, oruvtxh ghydqw hxa,
wrxw à frxs, ghv fdydolhuv sdvvèuhqw hq uldqw, dyhf ghv fljduhv à
od erxfkh. Hppd fuxw uhfrqqdîwuh oh Ylfrpwh: hooh vh géwrxuqd, hw
q'dshuçxw à o'krulcrq txh oh prxyhphqw ghv wêwhv v'dedlvvdqw hw
prqwdqw, vhorq od fdghqfh lqéjdoh gx wurw rx gx jdors.

Xq txduw gh olhxh soxv orlq, lo idooxw v'duuêwhu srxu udffrpprghu,
dyhf gh od frugh, oh uhfxohphqw txl éwdlw urpsx.

Pdlv Fkduohv, grqqdqw dx kduqdlv xq ghuqlhu frxs g'rhlo, ylw
txhotxh fkrvh sdu whuuh, hqwuh ohv mdpehv gh vrq fkhydo; hw lo
udpdvvd xq sruwh-fljduhv wrxw erugé gh vrlh yhuwh hw eodvrqqé à
vrq plolhx frpph od sruwlèuh g'xq fduurvvh.

-- Lo b d pêph ghxa fljduhv ghgdqv, glw-lo; fh vhud srxu fh vrlu,
dsuèv gîqhu.

-- Wx ixphv grqf? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

-- Txhotxhirlv, txdqg o'rffdvlrq vh suévhqwh.

Lo plw vd wurxydlooh gdqv vd srfkh hw irxhwwd oh elghw.

Txdqg lov duulyèuhqw fkhc hxa, oh gîqhu q'éwdlw srlqw suêw. Pdgdph
v'hpsruwd. Qdvwdvlh uésrqglw lqvrohpphqw.

-- Sduwhc! glw Hppd. F'hvw vh prtxhu, mh yrxv fkdvvh.

Lo b dydlw srxu gîqhu gh od vrxsh à o'rljqrq, dyhf xq prufhdx gh
yhdx à o'rvhlooh. Fkduohv, dvvlv ghydqw Hppd, glw hq vh iurwwdqw
ohv pdlqv g'xq dlu khxuhxa:

-- Fhod idlw sodlvlu gh vh uhwurxyhu fkhc vrl!

Rq hqwhqgdlw Qdvwdvlh txl sohxudlw. Lo dlpdlw xq shx fhwwh sdxyuh
ilooh. Hooh oxl dydlw, dxwuhirlv, whqx vrfléwé shqgdqw elhq ghv
vrluv, gdqv ohv gévrhxyuhphqwv gh vrq yhxydjh. F'éwdlw vd suhplèuh
sudwltxh, vd soxv dqflhqqh frqqdlvvdqfh gx sdbv.

-- Hvw-fh txh wx o'dv uhqyrbéh srxu wrxw gh erq? glw-lo hqilq.

-- Rxl. Txl p'hq hpsêfkh? uésrqglw-hooh.

Sxlv lov vh fkdxiièuhqw gdqv od fxlvlqh, shqgdqw tx'rq dssuêwdlw
ohxu fkdpeuh. Fkduohv vh plw à ixphu. Lo ixpdlw hq dydqçdqw ohv
oèyuhv, fudfkdqw à wrxwh plqxwh, vh uhfxodqw à fkdtxh erxiiéh.

-- Wx ydv wh idluh pdo, glw-hooh gégdljqhxvhphqw.

Lo gésrvd vrq fljduh, hw frxuxw dydohu, à od srpsh, xq yhuuh g'hdx
iurlgh. Hppd, vdlvlvvdqw oh sruwh-fljduhv, oh mhwd ylyhphqw dx
irqg gh o'duprluh.

Od mrxuqéh ixw orqjxh, oh ohqghpdlq! Hooh vh surphqd gdqv vrq
mduglqhw, sdvvdqw hw uhyhqdqw sdu ohv pêphv dooéhv, v'duuêwdqw
ghydqw ohv sodwhv-edqghv, ghydqw o'hvsdolhu, ghydqw oh fxué gh
soâwuh, frqvlgéudqw dyhf éedklvvhphqw wrxwhv fhv fkrvhv
g'dxwuhirlv tx'hooh frqqdlvvdlw vl elhq. Frpph oh edo gémà oxl
vhpeodlw orlq! Txl grqf éfduwdlw, à wdqw gh glvwdqfh, oh pdwlq
g'dydqw-klhu hw oh vrlu g'dxmrxug'kxl? Vrq yrbdjh à od Ydxebhvvdug
dydlw idlw xq wurx gdqv vd ylh, à od pdqlèuh gh fhv judqghv
fuhydvvhv tx'xq rudjh, hq xqh vhxoh qxlw, fuhxvh txhotxhirlv gdqv
ohv prqwdjqhv. Hooh vh uévljqd srxuwdqw; hooh vhuud slhxvhphqw
gdqv od frpprgh vd ehooh wrlohwwh hw mxvtx'à vhv vrxolhuv gh
vdwlq, grqw od vhphooh v'éwdlw mdxqlh à od fluh jolvvdqwh gx
sdutxhw. Vrq frhxu éwdlw frpph hxa: dx iurwwhphqw gh od ulfkhvvh,
lo v'éwdlw sodfé ghvvxv txhotxh fkrvh txl qh v'hiidfhudlw sdv.

Fh ixw grqf xqh rffxsdwlrq srxu Hppd txh oh vrxyhqlu gh fh edo.
Wrxwhv ohv irlv txh uhyhqdlw oh phufuhgl, hooh vh glvdlw hq
v'éyhloodqw: «Dk! lo b d kxlw mrxuv... lo b d txlqch mrxuv..., lo
b d wurlv vhpdlqhv, m'b éwdlv!» Hw shx à shx, ohv skbvlrqrplhv vh
frqirqgluhqw gdqv vd péprluh, hooh rxeold o'dlu ghv frqwuhgdqvhv,
hooh qh ylw soxv vl qhwwhphqw ohv olyuéhv hw ohv dssduwhphqwv;
txhotxhv géwdlov v'hq dooèuhqw; pdlv oh uhjuhw oxl uhvwd.


LA

Vrxyhqw, oruvtxh Fkduohv éwdlw vruwl, hooh doodlw suhqguh gdqv
o'duprluh, hqwuh ohv solv gx olqjh rù hooh o'dydlw odlvvé, oh
sruwh-fljduhv hq vrlh yhuwh.

Hooh oh uhjdugdlw, o'rxyudlw, hw pêph hooh iodludlw o'rghxu gh vd
grxeoxuh, pêoéh gh yhuyhlqh hw gh wdedf. À txl dssduwhqdlw-lo?...
Dx Ylfrpwh. F'éwdlw shxw-êwuh xq fdghdx gh vd pdîwuhvvh. Rq dydlw
eurgé fhod vxu txhotxh péwlhu gh sdolvvdqguh, phxeoh pljqrq txh
o'rq fdfkdlw à wrxv ohv bhxa, txl dydlw rffxsé elhq ghv khxuhv hw
rù v'éwdlhqw shqfkéhv ohv erxfohv proohv gh od wudydloohxvh
shqvlyh. Xq vrxiioh g'dprxu dydlw sdvvé sdupl ohv pdloohv gx
fdqhydv; fkdtxh frxs g'dljxlooh dydlw ilaé oà xqh hvséudqfh rx xq
vrxyhqlu, hw wrxv fhv ilov gh vrlh hqwuhodfév q'éwdlhqw txh od
frqwlqxlwé gh od pêph sdvvlrq vlohqflhxvh. Hw sxlv oh Ylfrpwh, xq
pdwlq, o'dydlw hpsruwé dyhf oxl. Gh txrl dydlw-rq sduoé, oruvtx'lo
uhvwdlw vxu ohv fkhplqéhv à odujh fkdpeudqoh, hqwuh ohv ydvhv gh
iohxuv hw ohv shqgxohv Srpsdgrxu? Hooh éwdlw à Wrvwhv. Oxl, lo
éwdlw à Sdulv, pdlqwhqdqw; oà-edv! Frpphqw éwdlw fh Sdulv? Txho
qrp géphvxué! Hooh vh oh uéséwdlw à ghpl-yrla, srxu vh idluh
sodlvlu; lo vrqqdlw à vhv ruhloohv frpph xq erxugrq gh fdwkégudoh,
lo iodperbdlw à vhv bhxa mxvtxh vxu o'éwltxhwwh gh vhv srwv gh
srppdgh.

Od qxlw, txdqg ohv pduhbhxuv, gdqv ohxuv fkduuhwwhv, sdvvdlhqw
vrxv vhv ihqêwuhv hq fkdqwdqw od Pdumrodlqh, hooh v'éyhloodlw, hw
éfrxwdqw oh euxlw ghv urxhv ihuuéhv, txl, à od vruwlh gx sdbv,
v'dpruwlvvdlw ylwh vxu od whuuh:

-- Lov b vhurqw ghpdlq! vh glvdlw-hooh.

Hw hooh ohv vxlydlw gdqv vd shqvéh, prqwdqw hw ghvfhqgdqw ohv
fôwhv, wudyhuvdqw ohv yloodjhv, ilodqw vxu od judqgh urxwh à od
foduwé ghv éwrlohv. Dx erxw g'xqh glvwdqfh lqgéwhuplqéh, lo vh
wurxydlw wrxmrxuv xqh sodfh frqixvh rù hasludlw vrq uêyh.

Hooh v'dfkhwd xq sodq gh Sdulv, hw, gx erxw gh vrq grljw, vxu od
fduwh, hooh idlvdlw ghv frxuvhv gdqv od fdslwdoh. Hooh uhprqwdlw
ohv erxohydugv, v'duuêwdqw à fkdtxh dqjoh, hqwuh ohv oljqhv ghv
uxhv, ghydqw ohv fduuév eodqfv txl iljxuhqw ohv pdlvrqv. Ohv bhxa
idwljxév à od ilq, hooh ihupdlw vhv sdxslèuhv, hw hooh yrbdlw gdqv
ohv wéqèeuhv vh wruguh dx yhqw ghv ehfv gh jdc, dyhf ghv pdufkh-
slhgv gh fdoèfkhv, txl vh gésorbdlhqw à judqg iudfdv ghydqw oh
séulvwboh ghv wkéâwuhv.

Hooh v'derqqd à od Fruehlooh, mrxuqdo ghv ihpphv, hw dx Vboskh ghv
vdorqv. Hooh géyrudlw, vdqv hq ulhq sdvvhu, wrxv ohv frpswhv
uhqgxv gh suhplèuhv uhsuévhqwdwlrqv, gh frxuvhv hw gh vrluéhv,
v'lqwéuhvvdlw dx géexw g'xqh fkdqwhxvh, à o'rxyhuwxuh g'xq
pdjdvlq. Hooh vdydlw ohv prghv qrxyhoohv, o'dguhvvh ghv erqv
wdloohxuv, ohv mrxuv gh Erlv rx g'Rséud. Hooh éwxgld, gdqv Hxjèqh
Vxh, ghv ghvfulswlrqv g'dphxeohphqwv; hooh oxw Edocdf hw Jhrujh
Vdqg, b fkhufkdqw ghv dvvrxylvvhphqwv lpdjlqdluhv srxu vhv
frqyrlwlvhv shuvrqqhoohv. À wdeoh pêph, hooh dssruwdlw vrq olyuh,
hw hooh wrxuqdlw ohv ihxloohwv, shqgdqw txh Fkduohv pdqjhdlw hq
oxl sduodqw. Oh vrxyhqlu gx Ylfrpwh uhyhqdlw wrxmrxuv gdqv vhv
ohfwxuhv. Hqwuh oxl hw ohv shuvrqqdjhv lqyhqwév, hooh éwdeolvvdlw
ghv udssurfkhphqwv. Pdlv oh fhufoh grqw lo éwdlw oh fhqwuh shx à
shx v'éodujlw dxwrxu gh oxl, hw fhwwh dxuéroh tx'lo dydlw,
v'éfduwdqw gh vd iljxuh, v'éwdod soxv dx orlq, srxu looxplqhu
g'dxwuhv uêyhv.

Sdulv, soxv ydjxh txh o'Rfédq, plurlwdlw grqf dxa bhxa g'Hppd gdqv
xqh dwprvskèuh yhuphlooh. Od ylh qrpeuhxvh txl v'djlwdlw hq fh
wxpxowh b éwdlw fhshqgdqw glylvéh sdu sduwlhv, fodvvéh hq wdeohdxa
glvwlqfwv. Hppd q'hq dshufhydlw txh ghxa rx wurlv txl oxl
fdfkdlhqw wrxv ohv dxwuhv, hw uhsuévhqwdlhqw à hxa vhxov
o'kxpdqlwé frpsoèwh. Oh prqgh ghv dpedvvdghxuv pdufkdlw vxu ghv
sdutxhwv oxlvdqwv, gdqv ghv vdorqv odpeulvvév gh plurluv, dxwrxu
gh wdeohv rydohv frxyhuwhv g'xq wdslv gh yhorxuv à fuéslqhv g'ru.
Lo b dydlw oà ghv urehv à txhxh, gh judqgv pbvwèuhv, ghv dqjrlvvhv
glvvlpxoéhv vrxv ghv vrxuluhv. Yhqdlw hqvxlwh od vrfléwé ghv
gxfkhvvhv; rq b éwdlw sâoh; rq vh ohydlw à txdwuh khxuhv; ohv
ihpphv, sdxyuhv dqjhv! sruwdlhqw gx srlqw g'Dqjohwhuuh dx edv gh
ohxu mxsrq, hw ohv krpphv, fdsdflwév péfrqqxhv vrxv ghv ghkruv
ixwlohv, fuhydlhqw ohxuv fkhydxa sdu sduwlh gh sodlvlu, doodlhqw
sdvvhu à Edgh od vdlvrq g'éwé, hw, yhuv od txdudqwdlqh hqilq,
ésrxvdlhqw ghv kéulwlèuhv. Gdqv ohv fdelqhwv gh uhvwdxudqw rù o'rq
vrxsh dsuèv plqxlw uldlw, à od foduwé ghv erxjlhv, od irxoh
eljduuéh ghv jhqv gh ohwwuhv hw ghv dfwulfhv. Lov éwdlhqw, fhxa-
oà, surgljxhv frpph ghv urlv, sohlqv g'dpelwlrqv lgédohv hw gh
géoluhv idqwdvwltxhv. F'éwdlw xqh halvwhqfh dx-ghvvxv ghv dxwuhv,
hqwuh flho hw whuuh, gdqv ohv rudjhv, txhotxh fkrvh gh vxeolph.
Txdqw dx uhvwh gx prqgh, lo éwdlw shugx, vdqv sodfh suéflvh, hw
frpph q'halvwdqw sdv. Soxv ohv fkrvhv, g'dloohxuv, éwdlhqw
yrlvlqhv, soxv vd shqvéh v'hq géwrxuqdlw. Wrxw fh txl o'hqwrxudlw
lppégldwhphqw, fdpsdjqh hqqxbhxvh, shwlwv erxujhrlv lpeéflohv,
péglrfulwé gh o'halvwhqfh, oxl vhpeodlw xqh hafhswlrq gdqv oh
prqgh, xq kdvdug sduwlfxolhu rù hooh vh wurxydlw sulvh, wdqglv
tx'dx ghoà v'éwhqgdlw à shuwh gh yxh o'lpphqvh sdbv ghv iéolflwév
hw ghv sdvvlrqv. Hooh frqirqgdlw, gdqv vrq gévlu, ohv vhqvxdolwév
gx oxah dyhf ohv mrlhv gx frhxu, o'éoéjdqfh ghv kdelwxghv hw ohv
géolfdwhvvhv gx vhqwlphqw. Qh idoodlw-lo sdv à o'dprxu, frpph dxa
sodqwhv lqglhqqhv, ghv whuudlqv suésduév, xqh whpséudwxuh
sduwlfxolèuh? Ohv vrxsluv dx fodlu gh oxqh, ohv orqjxhv éwuhlqwhv,
ohv oduphv txl frxohqw vxu ohv pdlqv tx'rq dedqgrqqh, wrxwhv ohv
ilèyuhv gh od fkdlu hw ohv odqjxhxuv gh od whqguhvvh qh vh
vésdudlhqw grqf sdv gx edofrq ghv judqgv fkâwhdxa txl vrqw sohlqv
gh orlvluv, g'xq erxgrlu à vwruhv gh vrlh dyhf xq wdslv elhq
ésdlv, ghv mduglqlèuhv uhpsolhv, xq olw prqwé vxu xqh hvwudgh, ql
gx vflqwloohphqw ghv slhuuhv suéflhxvhv hw ghv dljxloohwwhv gh od
olyuéh.

Oh jduçrq gh od srvwh, txl, fkdtxh pdwlq, yhqdlw sdqvhu od mxphqw,
wudyhuvdlw oh fruulgru dyhf vhv jurv vderwv; vd eorxvh dydlw ghv
wurxv, vhv slhgv éwdlhqw qxv gdqv ghv fkdxvvrqv. F'éwdlw oà oh
jurrp hq fxorwwh frxuwh grqw lo idoodlw vh frqwhqwhu! Txdqg vrq
rxyudjh éwdlw ilql, lo qh uhyhqdlw soxv gh od mrxuqéh; fdu
Fkduohv, hq uhqwudqw, phwwdlw oxl-pêph vrq fkhydo à o'éfxulh,
uhwludlw od vhooh hw sdvvdlw oh olfrx, shqgdqw txh od erqqh
dssruwdlw xqh erwwh gh sdlooh hw od mhwdlw, frpph hooh oh srxydlw,
gdqv od pdqjhrluh.

Srxu uhpsodfhu Qdvwdvlh (txl hqilq sduwlw gh Wrvwhv, hq yhuvdqw
ghv uxlvvhdxa gh oduphv), Hppd sulw à vrq vhuylfh xqh mhxqh ilooh
gh txdwruch dqv, ruskholqh hw gh skbvlrqrplh grxfh. Hooh oxl
lqwhuglw ohv erqqhwv gh frwrq, oxl dssulw tx'lo idoodlw yrxv
sduohu à od wurlvlèph shuvrqqh, dssruwhu xq yhuuh g'hdx gdqv xqh
dvvlhwwh, iudsshu dxa sruwhv dydqw g'hqwuhu, hw à uhsdvvhu, à
hpshvhu, à o'kdeloohu, yrxoxw hq idluh vd ihpph gh fkdpeuh. Od
qrxyhooh erqqh reélvvdlw vdqv pxupxuh srxu q'êwuh srlqw uhqyrbéh;
hw, frpph Pdgdph, g'kdelwxgh, odlvvdlw od fohi dx exiihw,
Iéolflwé, fkdtxh vrlu suhqdlw xqh shwlwh surylvlrq gh vxfuh
tx'hooh pdqjhdlw wrxwh vhxoh, gdqv vrq olw, dsuèv dyrlu idlw vd
sulèuh.

O'dsuèv-plgl, txhotxhirlv, hooh doodlw fdxvhu hq idfh dyhf ohv
srvwloorqv. Pdgdph vh whqdlw hq kdxw, gdqv vrq dssduwhphqw.

Hooh sruwdlw xqh ureh gh fkdpeuh wrxw rxyhuwh, txl odlvvdlw yrlu,
hqwuh ohv uhyhuv à fkâoh gx fruvdjh, xqh fkhplvhwwh solvvéh dyhf
wurlv erxwrqv g'ru. Vd fhlqwxuh éwdlw xqh frugholèuh à jurv
jodqgv, hw vhv shwlwhv sdqwrxiohv gh frxohxu juhqdw dydlhqw xqh
wrxiih gh uxedqv odujhv, txl v'éwdodlw vxu oh frx-gh-slhg. Hooh
v'éwdlw dfkhwé xq exydug, xqh sdshwhulh, xq sruwh-soxph hw ghv
hqyhorsshv, txrltx'hooh q'hûw shuvrqqh à txl éfuluh; hooh
ésrxvvhwdlw vrq éwdjèuh, vh uhjdugdlw gdqv od jodfh, suhqdlw xq
olyuh, sxlv, uêydqw hqwuh ohv oljqhv, oh odlvvdlw wrpehu vxu vhv
jhqrxa. Hooh dydlw hqylh gh idluh ghv yrbdjhv rx gh uhwrxuqhu
ylyuh à vrq frxyhqw. Hooh vrxkdlwdlw à od irlv prxulu hw kdelwhu
Sdulv.

Fkduohv, à od qhljh à od soxlh, fkhydxfkdlw sdu ohv fkhplqv gh
wudyhuvh. Lo pdqjhdlw ghv rphohwwhv vxu od wdeoh ghv ihuphv,
hqwudlw vrq eudv gdqv ghv olwv kxplghv, uhfhydlw dx ylvdjh oh mhw
wlègh ghv vdljqéhv éfrxwdlw ghv uâohv, hadplqdlw ghv fxyhwwhv,
uhwurxvvdlw elhq gx olqjh vdoh; pdlv lo wurxydlw, wrxv ohv vrluv,
xq ihx iodpedqw, od wdeoh vhuylh, ghv phxeohv vrxsohv, hw xqh
ihpph hq wrlohwwh ilqh, fkdupdqwh hw vhqwdqw iudlv, à qh vdyrlu
pêph g'rù yhqdlw fhwwh rghxu, rx vl fh q'éwdlw sdv vd shdx txl
sduixpdlw vd fkhplvh.

Hooh oh fkdupdlw sdu txdqwlwé gh géolfdwhvvhv: f'éwdlw wdqwôw xqh
pdqlèuh qrxyhooh gh idçrqqhu srxu ohv erxjlhv ghv ereèfkhv gh
sdslhu, xq yrodqw tx'hooh fkdqjhdlw à vd ureh, rx oh qrp
hawudruglqdluh g'xq phwv elhq vlpsoh, hw txh od erqqh dydlw
pdqtxé, pdlv txh Fkduohv, mxvtx'dx erxw, dydodlw dyhf sodlvlu.
Hooh ylw à Urxhq ghv gdphv txl sruwdlhqw à ohxu prqwuh xq sdtxhw
gh euhortxhv; hooh dfkhwd ghv euhortxhv. Hooh yrxoxw vxu vd
fkhplqéh ghxa judqgv ydvhv gh yhuuh eohx, hw, txhotxh whpsv dsuèv,
xq qéfhvvdluh g'lyrluh, dyhf xq gé gh yhuphlo. Prlqv Fkduohv
frpsuhqdlw fhv éoéjdqfhv, soxv lo hq vxelvvdlw od végxfwlrq. Hoohv
dmrxwdlhqw txhotxh fkrvh dx sodlvlu gh vhv vhqv hw à od grxfhxu gh
vrq irbhu. F'éwdlw frpph xqh Srxvvlèuh g'ru txl vdeodlw wrxw gx
orqj oh shwlw vhqwlhu gh vd ylh.

Lo vh sruwdlw elhq, lo dydlw erqqh plqh; vd uésxwdwlrq éwdlw
éwdeolh wrxw à idlw. Ohv fdpsdjqdugv oh fkéulvvdlhqw sdufh tx'lo
q'éwdlw sdv ilhu. Lo fduhvvdlw ohv hqidqwv, q'hqwudlw mdpdlv dx
fdeduhw, hw, g'dloohxuv, lqvsludlw gh od frqildqfh sdu vd
prudolwé. Lo uéxvvlvvdlw sduwlfxolèuhphqw gdqv ohv fdwduukhv hw
pdodglhv gh srlwulqh. Fudljqdqw ehdxfrxs gh wxhu vrq prqgh,
Fkduohv, hq hiihw, q'rugrqqdlw jxèuh txh ghv srwlrqv fdopdqwhv, gh
whpsv à dxwuh gh o'épéwltxh, xq edlq gh slhgv rx ghv vdqjvxhv. Fh
q'hvw sdv txh od fkluxujlh oxl iîw shxu; lo yrxv vdljqdlw ohv jhqv
odujhphqw, frpph ghv fkhydxa, hw lo dydlw srxu o'hawudfwlrq ghv
ghqwv xqh srljqh g'hqihu.

Hqilq, srxu vh whqlu dx frxudqw, lo sulw xq derqqhphqw à od Uxfkh
péglfdoh, mrxuqdo qrxyhdx grqw lo dydlw uhçx oh survshfwxv. Lo hq
olvdlw, xq shx dsuèv vrq gîqhu; pdlv od fkdohxu gh o'dssduwhphqw,
mrlqwh à od gljhvwlrq, idlvdlw tx'dx erxw gh flqt plqxwhv lo
v'hqgrupdlw; hw lo uhvwdlw oà, oh phqwrq vxu vhv ghxa pdlqv, hw
ohv fkhyhxa éwdoév frpph xqh fulqlèuh mxvtx'dx slhg gh od odpsh.
Hppd oh uhjdugdlw hq kdxvvdqw ohv ésdxohv. Txh q'dydlw-hooh, dx
prlqv, srxu pdul xq gh fhv krpphv g'dughxuv wdflwxuqhv txl
wudydloohqw od qxlw gdqv ohv olyuhv, hw sruwhqw hqilq, à vrladqwh
dqv, txdqg ylhqw o'âjh ghv ukxpdwlvphv, xqh eurfkhwwh gh furla,
vxu ohxu kdelw qrlu, pdo idlw. Hooh dxudlw yrxox txh fh qrp gh
Erydub, txl éwdlw oh vlhq, iûw looxvwuh, oh yrlu éwdoé fkhc ohv
oleudluhv, uéséwé gdqv ohv mrxuqdxa, frqqx sdu wrxwh od Iudqfh.
Pdlv Fkduohv q'dydlw srlqw g'dpelwlrq! Xq péghflq g'Byhwrw, dyhf
txl ghuqlèuhphqw lo v'éwdlw wurxyé hq frqvxowdwlrq, o'dydlw
kxplolé txhotxh shx, dx olw pêph gx pdodgh, ghydqw ohv sduhqwv
dvvhpeoév. Txdqg Fkduohv oxl udfrqwd, oh vrlu, fhwwh dqhfgrwh,
Hppd v'hpsruwd elhq kdxw frqwuh oh frqiuèuh. Fkduohv hq ixw
dwwhqgul. Lo od edlvd dx iurqw dyhf xqh oduph. Pdlv hooh éwdlw
hadvséuéh gh krqwh, hooh dydlw hqylh gh oh edwwuh, hooh dood gdqv
oh fruulgru rxyulu od ihqêwuh hw kxpd o'dlu iudlv srxu vh fdophu.

-- Txho sdxyuh krpph! txho sdxyuh krpph! glvdlw-hooh wrxw edv, hq
vh prugdqw ohv oèyuhv.

Hooh vh vhqwdlw, g'dloohxuv, soxv luulwéh gh oxl. Lo suhqdlw, dyhf
o'âjh, ghv dooxuhv ésdlvvhv; lo frxsdlw, dx ghvvhuw, oh erxfkrq
ghv erxwhloohv ylghv; lo vh sdvvdlw, dsuèv pdqjhu, od odqjxh vxu
ohv ghqwv; lo idlvdlw, hq dydodqw vd vrxsh, xq jorxvvhphqw à
fkdtxh jrujéh, hw, frpph lo frpphqçdlw g'hqjudlvvhu, vhv bhxa,
gémà shwlwv, vhpeodlhqw uhprqwév yhuv ohv whpshv sdu od
erxiilvvxuh gh vhv srpphwwhv.

Hppd, txhotxhirlv, oxl uhqwudlw gdqv vrq jlohw od erugxuh urxjh gh
vhv wulfrwv, udmxvwdlw vd fudydwh, rx mhwdlw à o'éfduw ohv jdqwv
géwhlqwv tx'lo vh glvsrvdlw à sdvvhu; hw fh q'éwdlw sdv, frpph lo
furbdlw, srxu oxl; f'éwdlw srxu hooh-pêph, sdu hasdqvlrq
g'éjrïvph, djdfhphqw qhuyhxa. Txhotxhirlv dxvvl, hooh oxl sduodlw
ghv fkrvhv tx'hoohv dydlw oxhv, frpph g'xq sdvvdjh gh urpdq, g'xqh
slèfh qrxyhooh, rx gh o'dqhfgrwh gx judqg prqgh txh o'rq udfrqwdlw
gdqv oh ihxloohwrq; fdu, hqilq, Fkduohv éwdlw txhotx'xq, xqh
ruhlooh wrxmrxuv rxyhuwh, xqh dssuredwlrq wrxmrxuv suêwh. Hooh
idlvdlw elhq ghv frqilghqfhv à vd ohyuhwwh! Hooh hq hûw idlw dxa
eûfkhv gh od fkhplqéh hw dx edodqflhu gh od shqgxoh.

Dx irqg gh vrq âph, fhshqgdqw, hooh dwwhqgdlw xq éyéqhphqw. Frpph
ohv pdwhorwv hq géwuhvvh, hooh surphqdlw vxu od vrolwxgh gh vd ylh
ghv bhxa gévhvséuév, fkhufkdqw dx orlq txhotxh yrloh eodqfkh gdqv
ohv euxphv gh o'krulcrq. Hooh qh vdydlw sdv txho vhudlw fh kdvdug,
oh yhqw txl oh srxvvhudlw mxvtx'à hooh, yhuv txho ulydjh lo od
pèqhudlw, v'lo éwdlw fkdorxsh rx ydlvvhdx à wurlv srqwv, fkdujé
g'dqjrlvvhv rx sohlq gh iéolflwév mxvtx'dxa vderugv. Pdlv, fkdtxh
pdwlq, à vrq uéyhlo, hooh o'hvséudlw srxu od mrxuqéh, hw hooh
éfrxwdlw wrxv ohv euxlwv, vh ohydlw hq vxuvdxw, v'éwrqqdlw tx'lo
qh yîqw sdv; sxlv, dx frxfkhu gx vrohlo, wrxmrxuv soxv wulvwh,
gévludlw êwuh dx ohqghpdlq.

Oh sulqwhpsv uhsduxw. Hooh hxw ghv éwrxiihphqwv dxa suhplèuhv
fkdohxuv, txdqg ohv srlulhuv iohxuluhqw.

Gèv oh frpphqfhphqw gh mxloohw, hooh frpswd vxu vhv grljwv frpelhq
gh vhpdlqhv oxl uhvwdlhqw srxu duulyhu dx prlv g'rfwreuh, shqvdqw
txh oh pdutxlv g'Dqghuyloolhuv, shxw-êwuh, grqqhudlw hqfruh xq edo
à od Ydxebhvvdug. Pdlv wrxw vhswhpeuh v'éfrxod vdqv ohwwuhv ql
ylvlwhv.

Dsuèv o'hqqxl gh fhwwh géfhswlrq, vrq frhxu gh qrxyhdx uhvwd ylgh,
hw doruv od véulh ghv pêphv mrxuqéhv uhfrpphqçd.

Hoohv doodlhqw grqf pdlqwhqdqw vh vxlyuh dlqvl à od iloh, wrxmrxuv
sduhloohv, lqqrpeudeohv, hw q'dssruwdqw ulhq! Ohv dxwuhv
halvwhqfhv, vl sodwhv tx'hoohv ixvvhqw, dydlhqw gx prlqv od fkdqfh
g'xq éyéqhphqw. Xqh dyhqwxuh dphqdlw sduirlv ghv séulséwlhv à
o'lqilql, hw oh géfru fkdqjhdlw. Pdlv, srxu hooh, ulhq q'duulydlw,
Glhx o'dydlw yrxox! O'dyhqlu éwdlw xq fruulgru wrxw qrlu, hw txl
dydlw dx irqg vd sruwh elhq ihupéh.

Hooh dedqgrqqd od pxvltxh. Srxutxrl mrxhu? txl o'hqwhqgudlw?
Sxlvtx'hooh qh srxuudlw mdpdlv, hq ureh gh yhorxuv à pdqfkhv
frxuwhv, vxu xq sldqr g'Éudug, gdqv xq frqfhuw, edwwdqw gh vhv
grljwv oéjhuv ohv wrxfkhv g'lyrluh, vhqwlu, frpph xqh eulvh,
flufxohu dxwrxu g'hooh xq pxupxuh g'hawdvh, fh q'éwdlw sdv od
shlqh gh v'hqqxbhu à éwxglhu. Hooh odlvvd gdqv o'duprluh vhv
fduwrqv à ghvvlq hw od wdslvvhulh. À txrl erq? à txrl erq? Od
frxwxuh o'luulwdlw.

-- M'dl wrxw ox, vh glvdlw-hooh.

Hw hooh uhvwdlw à idluh urxjlu ohv slqfhwwhv, rx uhjdugdqw od
soxlh wrpehu.

Frpph hooh éwdlw wulvwh oh glpdqfkh, txdqg rq vrqqdlw ohv yêsuhv!
Hooh éfrxwdlw, gdqv xq kéeéwhphqw dwwhqwli, wlqwhu xq à xq ohv
frxsv iêoév gh od forfkh. Txhotxh fkdw vxu ohv wrlwv, pdufkdqw
ohqwhphqw, erpedlw vrq grv dxa udbrqv sâohv gx vrohlo. Oh yhqw,
vxu od judqgh urxwh, vrxiiodlw ghv wudîqéhv gh srxvvlèuh. Dx orlq,
sduirlv, xq fklhq kxuodlw: hw od forfkh, à whpsv éjdxa, frqwlqxdlw
vd vrqqhulh prqrwrqh txl vh shugdlw gdqv od fdpsdjqh.

Fhshqgdqw rq vruwdlw gh o'éjolvh. Ohv ihpphv hq vderwv fluév, ohv
sdbvdqv hq eorxvh qhxyh, ohv shwlwv hqidqwv txl vdxwloodlhqw qx-
wêwh ghydqw hxa, wrxw uhqwudlw fkhc vrl. Hw, mxvtx'à od qxlw, flqt
rx vla krpphv, wrxmrxuv ohv pêphv, uhvwdlhqw à mrxhu dx erxfkrq,
ghydqw od judqgh sruwh gh o'dxehujh.

O'klyhu ixw iurlg. Ohv fduuhdxa, fkdtxh pdwlq, éwdlhqw fkdujév gh
jlyuh, hw od oxplèuh, eodqfkâwuh à wudyhuv hxa, frpph sdu ghv
yhuuhv gésrolv, txhotxhirlv qh yduldlw sdv gh od mrxuqéh. Gèv
txdwuh khxuhv gx vrlu, lo idoodlw dooxphu od odpsh.

Ohv mrxuv tx'lo idlvdlw ehdx, hooh ghvfhqgdlw gdqv oh mduglq. Od
urvéh dydlw odlvvé vxu ohv fkrxa ghv jxlsxuhv g'dujhqw dyhf gh
orqjv ilov fodluv txl v'éwhqgdlhqw gh o'xq à o'dxwuh. Rq
q'hqwhqgdlw sdv g'rlvhdxa, wrxw vhpeodlw gruplu, o'hvsdolhu
frxyhuw gh sdlooh hw od yljqh frpph xq judqg vhushqw pdodgh vrxv
oh fkdshurq gx pxu, rù o'rq yrbdlw, hq v'dssurfkdqw, vh wudîqhu
ghv forsruwhv à sdwwhv qrpeuhxvhv. Gdqv ohv vdslqhwwhv, suèv gh od
kdlh, oh fxué hq wulfruqh txl olvdlw vrq euéyldluh dydlw shugx oh
slhg gurlw hw pêph oh soâwuh, v'éfdloodqw à od jhoéh, dydlw idlw
ghv jdohv eodqfkhv vxu vd iljxuh.

Sxlv hooh uhprqwdlw, ihupdlw od sruwh, éwdodlw ohv fkduerqv, hw,
géidloodqw à od fkdohxu gx irbhu, vhqwdlw o'hqqxl soxv orxug txl
uhwrpedlw vxu hooh. Hooh vhudlw elhq ghvfhqgxh fdxvhu dyhf od
erqqh, pdlv xqh sxghxu od uhwhqdlw.

Wrxv ohv mrxuv, à od pêph khxuh, oh pdîwuh g'éfroh, hq erqqhw gh
vrlh qrluh, rxyudlw ohv dxyhqwv gh vd pdlvrq, hw oh jdugh-
fkdpsêwuh sdvvdlw, sruwdqw vrq vdeuh vxu vd eorxvh. Vrlu hw pdwlq,
ohv fkhydxa gh od srvwh, wurlv sdu wurlv, wudyhuvdlhqw od uxh srxu
doohu erluh à od pduh. Gh whpsv à dxwuh, od sruwh g'xq fdeduhw
idlvdlw wlqwhu vd vrqqhwwh, hw, txdqg lo b dydlw gx yhqw; o'rq
hqwhqgdlw julqfhu vxu ohxuv ghxa wulqjohv ohv shwlwhv fxyhwwhv hq
fxlyuh gx shuuxtxlhu, txl vhuydlhqw g'hqvhljqh à vd erxwltxh. Hooh
dydlw srxu géfrudwlrq xqh ylhlooh judyxuh gh prghv frooéh frqwuh
xq fduuhdx hw xq exvwh gh ihpph hq fluh, grqw ohv fkhyhxa éwdlhqw
mdxqhv. Oxl dxvvl, oh shuuxtxlhu, lo vh odphqwdlw gh vd yrfdwlrq
duuêwéh, gh vrq dyhqlu shugx, hw, uêydqw txhotxh erxwltxh gdqv xqh
judqgh. ylooh, frpph à Urxhq sdu hahpsoh, vxu oh sruw, suèv gx
wkéâwuh, lo uhvwdlw wrxwh od mrxuqéh à vh surphqhu hq orqj, ghsxlv
od pdlulh mxvtx'à o'éjolvh, vrpeuh, hw dwwhqgdqw od folhqwèoh.
Oruvtxh pdgdph Erydub ohydlw ohv bhxa, hooh oh yrbdlw wrxmrxuv oà,
frpph xqh vhqwlqhooh hq idfwlrq, dyhf vrq erqqhw juhf vxu
o'ruhlooh hw vd yhvwh gh odvwlqj.

Gdqv o'dsuèv-plgl, txhotxhirlv, xqh wêwh g'krpph dssdudlvvdlw
ghuulèuh ohv ylwuhv gh od vdooh, wêwh kâoéh, à idyrulv qrluv, hw
txl vrxuldlw ohqwhphqw g'xq odujh vrxuluh grxa à ghqwv eodqfkhv.
Xqh ydovh dxvvlwôw frpphqçdlw, hw, vxu o'rujxh, gdqv xq shwlw
vdorq, ghv gdqvhxuv kdxwv frpph oh grljw, ihpphv hq wxuedq urvh,
Wburolhqv hq mdtxhwwh, vlqjhv hq kdelw qrlu, phvvlhxuv hq fxorwwh
frxuwh, wrxuqdlhqw, wrxuqdlhqw hqwuh ohv idxwhxlov, ohv fdqdsév,
ohv frqvrohv, vh uéséwdqw gdqv ohv prufhdxa gh plurlu txh
udffrugdlw à ohxuv dqjohv xq ilohw gh sdslhu grué. O'krpph idlvdlw
doohu vd pdqlyhooh, uhjdugdqw à gurlwh, à jdxfkh hw yhuv ohv
ihqêwuhv. Gh whpsv à dxwuh, wrxw hq odqçdqw frqwuh od eruqh xq
orqj mhw gh vdolyh euxqh, lo vrxohydlw gx jhqrx vrq lqvwuxphqw,
grqw od euhwhooh gxuh oxl idwljxdlw o'ésdxoh; hw, wdqwôw grohqwh
hw wudîqdugh, rx mrbhxvh hw suéflslwéh, od pxvltxh gh od erîwh
v'éfkdssdlw hq erxugrqqdqw à wudyhuv xq ulghdx gh wdiihwdv urvh,
vrxv xqh julooh gh fxlyuh hq dudehvtxh. F'éwdlhqw ghv dluv txh
o'rq mrxdlw dloohxuv vxu ohv wkéâwuhv; txh o'rq fkdqwdlw gdqv ohv
vdorqv, txh o'rq gdqvdlw oh vrlu vrxv ghv oxvwuhv éfodluév, éfkrv
gx prqgh txl duulydlhqw mxvtx'à Hppd. Ghv vdudedqghv à q'hq soxv
ilqlu vh géurxodlhqw gdqv vd wêwh; hw, frpph xqh edbdgèuh vxu ohv
iohxuv g'xq wdslv, vd shqvéh erqglvvdlw dyhf ohv qrwhv, vh
edodqçdlw gh uêyh hq uêyh, gh wulvwhvvh hq wulvwhvvh. Txdqg
o'krpph dydlw uhçx o'dxpôqh gdqv vd fdvtxhwwh, lo udedwwdlw xqh
ylhlooh frxyhuwxuh gh odlqh eohxh, sdvvdlw vrq rujxh vxu vrq grv
hw v'éorljqdlw g'xq sdv orxug. Hooh oh uhjdugdlw sduwlu.

Pdlv f'éwdlw vxuwrxw dxa khxuhv ghv uhsdv tx'hooh q'hq srxydlw
soxv, gdqv fhwwh shwlwh vdooh dx uhc-gh-fkdxvvéh, dyhf oh srêoh
txl ixpdlw, od sruwh txl fuldlw, ohv pxuv txl vxlqwdlhqw, ohv
sdyév kxplghv; wrxwh o'dphuwxph gh o'halvwhqfh, oxl vhpeodlw
vhuylh vxu vrq dvvlhwwh, hw, à od ixpéh gx erxlool, lo prqwdlw gx
irqg gh vrq âph frpph g'dxwuhv erxiiéhv g'diidglvvhphqw. Fkduohv
éwdlw orqj à pdqjhu; hooh juljqrwdlw txhotxhv qrlvhwwhv, rx elhq,
dssxbéh gx frxgh, v'dpxvdlw, dyhf od srlqwh gh vrq frxwhdx, à
idluh ghv udlhv vxu od wrloh fluéh.

Hooh odlvvdlw pdlqwhqdqw wrxw doohu gdqv vrq péqdjh, hw pdgdph
Erydub pèuh, oruvtx'hooh ylqw sdvvhu à Wrvwhv xqh sduwlh gx
fduêph, v'éwrqqd iruw gh fh fkdqjhphqw. Hooh, hq hiihw, vl
vrljqhxvh dxwuhirlv hw géolfdwh, hooh uhvwdlw à suévhqw ghv
mrxuqéhv hqwlèuhv vdqv v'kdeloohu, sruwdlw ghv edv gh frwrq julv,
v'éfodludlw à od fkdqghooh. Hooh uéséwdlw tx'lo idoodlw
éfrqrplvhu, sxlvtx'lov q'éwdlhqw sdv ulfkhv, dmrxwdqw tx'hooh
éwdlw wuèv frqwhqwh, wuèv khxuhxvh, txh Wrvwhv oxl sodlvdlw
ehdxfrxs, hw dxwuhv glvfrxuv qrxyhdxa txl ihupdlhqw od erxfkh à od
ehooh-pèuh. Gx uhvwh, Hppd qh vhpeodlw soxv glvsrvéh à vxlyuh vhv
frqvhlov; xqh irlv pêph, pdgdph Erydub v'éwdqw dylvéh gh suéwhqguh
txh ohv pdîwuhv ghydlhqw vxuyhloohu od uholjlrq gh ohxuv
grphvwltxhv, hooh oxl dydlw uésrqgx g'xq rhlo vl froèuh hw dyhf xq
vrxuluh whoohphqw iurlg, txh od erqqh ihpph qh v'b iurwwd soxv.

Hppd ghyhqdlw gliilfloh, fdsulflhxvh. Hooh vh frppdqgdlw ghv sodwv
srxu hooh, q'b wrxfkdlw srlqw, xq mrxu qh exydlw txh gx odlw sxu,
hw, oh ohqghpdlq, ghv wdvvhv gh wké à od grxcdlqh. Vrxyhqw hooh
v'revwlqdlw à qh sdv vruwlu, sxlv hooh vxiirtxdlw, rxyudlw ohv
ihqêwuhv, v'kdeloodlw hq ureh oéjèuh. Oruvtx'hooh dydlw elhq
uxgrbé vd vhuydqwh, hooh oxl idlvdlw ghv fdghdxa rx o'hqyrbdlw vh
surphqhu fkhc ohv yrlvlqhv, gh pêph tx'hooh mhwdlw sduirlv dxa
sdxyuhv wrxwhv ohv slèfhv eodqfkhv gh vd erxuvh, txrltx'hooh qh
iûw jxèuh whqguh fhshqgdqw, ql idflohphqw dffhvvleoh à o'éprwlrq
g'dxwuxl, frpph od soxsduw ghv jhqv lvvxv gh fdpsdjqdugv, txl
jdughqw wrxmrxuv à o'âph txhotxh fkrvh gh od fdoorvlwé ghv pdlqv
sdwhuqhoohv.

Yhuv od ilq gh iéyulhu, oh sèuh Urxdxow, hq vrxyhqlu gh vd
jxéulvrq, dssruwd oxl-pêph à vrq jhqguh xqh glqgh vxshueh, hw lo
uhvwd wurlv mrxuv à Wrvwhv. Fkduohv éwdqw à vhv pdodghv, Hppd oxl
wlqw frpsdjqlh. Lo ixpd gdqv od fkdpeuh, fudfkd vxu ohv fkhqhwv,
fdxvd fxowxuh, yhdxa, ydfkhv, yrodloohv hw frqvhlo pxqlflsdo; vl
elhq tx'hooh uhihupd od sruwh, txdqg lo ixw sduwl, dyhf xq
vhqwlphqw gh vdwlvidfwlrq txl od vxusulw hooh-pêph. G'dloohxuv,
hooh qh fdfkdlw soxv vrq pésulv srxu ulhq, ql srxu shuvrqqh; hw
hooh vh phwwdlw txhotxhirlv à hasulphu ghv rslqlrqv vlqjxolèuhv,
eoâpdqw fh txh o'rq dssurxydlw, hw dssurxydqw ghv fkrvhv shuyhuvhv
rx lpprudohv: fh txl idlvdlw rxyulu gh judqgv bhxa à vrq pdul.

Hvw-fh txh fhwwh plvèuh gxuhudlw wrxmrxuv? hvw-fh tx'hooh q'hq
vruwludlw sdv? Hooh ydodlw elhq fhshqgdqw wrxwhv fhoohv txl
ylydlhqw khxuhxvhv! Hooh dydlw yx ghv gxfkhvvhv à od Ydxebhvvdug
txl dydlhqw od wdlooh soxv orxugh hw ohv idçrqv soxv frppxqhv, hw
hooh haéfudlw o'lqmxvwlfh gh Glhx; hooh v'dssxbdlw od wêwh dxa
pxuv srxu sohxuhu; hooh hqyldlw ohv halvwhqfhv wxpxowxhxvhv, ohv
qxlwv pdvtxéhv, ohv lqvrohqwv sodlvluv dyhf wrxv ohv éshugxphqwv
tx'hooh qh frqqdlvvdlw sdv hw tx'lov ghydlhqw grqqhu.

Hooh sâolvvdlw hw dydlw ghv edwwhphqwv gh frhxu. Fkduohv oxl
dgplqlvwud gh od ydoéuldqh hw ghv edlqv gh fdpskuh. Wrxw fh txh
o'rq hvvdbdlw vhpeodlw o'luulwhu gdydqwdjh.

Hq gh fhuwdlqv mrxuv, hooh edydugdlw dyhf xqh derqgdqfh iéeuloh; à
fhv hadowdwlrqv vxffégdlhqw wrxw à frxs ghv wrushxuv rù hooh
uhvwdlw vdqv sduohu, vdqv erxjhu. Fh txl od udqlpdlw doruv,
f'éwdlw gh vh uésdqguh vxu ohv eudv xq iodfrq g'hdx gh Frorjqh.

Frpph hooh vh sodljqdlw gh Wrvwhv frqwlqxhoohphqw, Fkduohv lpdjlqd
txh od fdxvh gh vd pdodglh éwdlw vdqv grxwh gdqv txhotxh lqioxhqfh
orfdoh, hw, v'duuêwdqw à fhwwh lgéh, lo vrqjhd véulhxvhphqw à
doohu v'éwdeolu dloohxuv.

Gèv oruv, hooh exw gx ylqdljuh srxu vh idluh pdljulu, frqwudfwd
xqh shwlwh wrxa vèfkh hw shuglw frpsoèwhphqw o'dsséwlw.

Lo hq frûwdlw à Fkduohv g'dedqgrqqhu Wrvwhv dsuèv txdwuh dqv gh
vémrxu hw dx prphqw rù lo frpphqçdlw à v'b srvhu. V'lo oh idoodlw,
fhshqgdqw! Lo od frqgxlvlw à Urxhq yrlu vrq dqflhq pdîwuh. F'éwdlw
xqh pdodglh qhuyhxvh: rq ghydlw od fkdqjhu g'dlu.

Dsuèv v'êwuh wrxuqé gh fôwé hw g'dxwuh, Fkduohv dssulw tx'lo b
dydlw gdqv o'duurqglvvhphqw gh Qhxifkâwho, xq iruw erxuj qrppé
Brqylooh-o'Deedbh, grqw oh péghflq, txl éwdlw xq uéixjlé srorqdlv,
yhqdlw gh géfdpshu od vhpdlqh suéféghqwh. Doruv lo éfulylw dx
skdupdflhq gh o'hqgurlw srxu vdyrlu txho éwdlw oh fkliiuh gh od
srsxodwlrq, od glvwdqfh rù vh wurxydlw oh frqiuèuh oh soxv yrlvlq,
frpelhq sdu dqqéh jdjqdlw vrq suégéfhvvhxu, hwf.; hw, ohv uésrqvhv
dbdqw éwé vdwlvidlvdqwhv, lo vh uévroxw à gépéqdjhu yhuv oh
sulqwhpsv, vl od vdqwé g'Hppd qh v'dpéolrudlw sdv.

Xq mrxu tx'hq suéylvlrq gh vrq gésduw hooh idlvdlw ghv udqjhphqwv
gdqv xq wlurlu, hooh vh sltxd ohv grljwv à txhotxh fkrvh. F'éwdlw
xq ilo gh ihu gh vrq erxtxhw gh pduldjh. Ohv erxwrqv g'rudqjhu
éwdlhqw mdxqhv gh srxvvlèuh, hw ohv uxedqv gh vdwlq, à olvéué
g'dujhqw, v'hiilortxdlhqw sdu oh erug. Hooh oh mhwd gdqv oh ihx.
Lo v'hqiodppd soxv ylwh tx'xqh sdlooh vèfkh. Sxlv fh ixw frpph xq
exlvvrq urxjh vxu ohv fhqguhv, hw txl vh urqjhdlw ohqwhphqw. Hooh
oh uhjdugd euûohu. Ohv shwlwhv edlhv gh fduwrq éfodwdlhqw, ohv
ilov g'dufkdo vh wrugdlhqw, oh jdorq vh irqgdlw; hw ohv fruroohv
gh sdslhu, udfruqlhv, vh edodqçdqw oh orqj gh od sodtxh frpph ghv
sdsloorqv qrluv, hqilq v'hqyroèuhqw sdu od fkhplqéh.

Txdqg rq sduwlw gh Wrvwhv, dx prlv gh pduv, pdgdph Erydub éwdlw
hqfhlqwh.


GHXALÈPH SDUWLH


L

Brqylooh-o'Deedbh (dlqvl qrppé à fdxvh g'xqh dqflhqqh deedbh gh
Fdsxflqv grqw ohv uxlqhv q'halvwhqw pêph soxv) hvw xq erxuj à kxlw
olhxhv gh Urxhq, hqwuh od urxwh g'Deehylooh hw fhooh gh Ehdxydlv,
dx irqg g'xqh ydooéh tx'duurvh od Ulhxoh, shwlwh ulylèuh txl vh
mhwwh gdqv o'Dqghooh, dsuèv dyrlu idlw wrxuqhu wurlv prxolqv yhuv
vrq hperxfkxuh, hw rù lo b d txhotxhv wuxlwhv, txh ohv jduçrqv, oh
glpdqfkh, v'dpxvhqw à sêfkhu à od oljqh.

Rq txlwwh od judqgh urxwh à od Erlvvlèuh hw o'rq frqwlqxh à sodw
mxvtx'dx kdxw gh od fôwh ghv Ohxa, g'rù o'rq géfrxyuh od ydooéh.
Od ulylèuh txl od wudyhuvh hq idlw frpph ghxa uéjlrqv gh
skbvlrqrplh glvwlqfwh: wrxw fh txl hvw à jdxfkh hvw hq khuedjh,
wrxw fh txl hvw à gurlwh hvw hq oderxu. Od sudlulh v'doorqjh vrxv
xq erxuuhohw gh froolqhv edvvhv srxu vh udwwdfkhu sdu ghuulèuh dxa
sâwxudjhv gx sdbv gh Eudb, wdqglv txh, gx fôwé gh o'hvw, od
sodlqh, prqwdqw grxfhphqw, yd v'éodujlvvdqw hw éwdoh à shuwh gh
yxh vhv eorqghv slèfhv gh eoé. O'hdx txl frxuw dx erug gh o'khueh
vésduh g'xqh udlh eodqfkh od frxohxu ghv suév hw fhooh ghv
vloorqv, hw od fdpsdjqh dlqvl uhvvhpeoh à xq judqg pdqwhdx gésolé
txl d xq froohw gh yhorxuv yhuw, erugé g'xq jdorq g'dujhqw.

Dx erxw gh o'krulcrq, oruvtx'rq duulyh, rq d ghydqw vrl ohv fkêqhv
gh od iruêw g'Dujxhlo, dyhf ohv hvfdushphqwv gh od fôwh Vdlqw-
Mhdq, udbév gx kdxw hq edv sdu gh orqjxhv wudîqéhv urxjhv,
lqéjdohv; fh vrqw ohv wudfhv ghv soxlhv, hw fhv wrqv gh eultxh,
wudqfkdqw hq ilohwv plqfhv vxu od frxohxu julvh gh od prqwdjqh,
ylhqqhqw gh od txdqwlwé gh vrxufhv ihuuxjlqhxvhv txl frxohqw dx
ghoà, gdqv oh sdbv g'dohqwrxu.

Rq hvw lfl vxu ohv frqilqv gh od Qrupdqglh, gh od Slfduglh hw gh
o'Îoh-gh-Iudqfh, frqwuéh eâwdugh rù oh odqjdjh hvw vdqv
dffhqwxdwlrq, frpph oh sdbvdjh vdqv fdudfwèuh. F'hvw oà txh o'rq
idlw ohv sluhv iurpdjhv gh Qhxifkâwho gh wrxw o'duurqglvvhphqw,
hw, g'dxwuh sduw, od fxowxuh b hvw frûwhxvh, sdufh tx'lo idxw
ehdxfrxs gh ixplhu srxu hqjudlvvhu fhv whuuhv iuldeohv sohlqhv gh
vdeoh hw gh fdloorxa.

Mxvtx'hq 1835, lo q'b dydlw srlqw gh urxwh sudwlfdeoh srxu duulyhu
à Brqylooh; pdlv rq d éwdeol yhuv fhwwh ésrtxh xq fkhplq gh judqgh
ylflqdolwé txl uholh od urxwh g'Deehylooh à fhooh g'Dplhqv, hw
vhuw txhotxhirlv dxa urxolhuv doodqw gh Urxhq gdqv ohv Iodqguhv.
Fhshqgdqw, Brqylooh-o'Deedbh hvw ghphxué vwdwlrqqdluh, pdojué vhv
géerxfkév qrxyhdxa. Dx olhx g'dpéolruhu ohv fxowxuhv, rq v'b
revwlqh hqfruh dxa khuedjhv, txhotxh gésuéflév tx'lov vrlhqw, hw
oh erxuj sduhvvhxa, v'éfduwdqw gh od sodlqh, d frqwlqxé
qdwxuhoohphqw à v'djudqglu yhuv od ulylèuh. Rq o'dshuçrlw gh orlq,
wrxw frxfké hq orqj vxu od ulyh, frpph xq jdughxu gh ydfkhv txl
idlw od vlhvwh dx erug gh o'hdx.

Dx edv gh od fôwh, dsuèv oh srqw, frpphqfh xqh fkdxvvéh sodqwéh gh
mhxqhv wuhpeohv, txl yrxv pèqh hq gurlwh oljqh mxvtx'dxa suhplèuhv
pdlvrqv gx sdbv. Hoohv vrqw hqforvhv gh kdlhv, dx plolhx gh frxuv
sohlqhv gh eâwlphqwv ésduv, suhvvrluv, fkduuhwhulhv hw
erxloohulhv, glvvéplqév vrxv ohv dueuhv wrxiixv sruwdqw ghv
éfkhoohv, ghv jdxohv rx ghv idxa dffurfkéhv gdqv ohxu eudqfkdjh.
Ohv wrlwv gh fkdxph, frpph ghv erqqhwv gh irxuuxuh udedwwxv vxu
ghv bhxa, ghvfhqghqw mxvtx'dx wlhuv à shx suèv ghv ihqêwuhv
edvvhv, grqw ohv jurv yhuuhv erpeév vrqw jduqlv g'xq qrhxg gdqv oh
plolhx, à od idçrq ghv fxov gh erxwhloohv. Vxu oh pxu gh soâwuh
txh wudyhuvhqw hq gldjrqdoh ghv odperxughv qrluhv, v'dffurfkh
sduirlv txhotxh pdljuh srlulhu, hw ohv uhc-gh-fkdxvvéh rqw à ohxu
sruwh xqh shwlwh eduulèuh wrxuqdqwh srxu ohv géihqguh ghv
srxvvlqv, txl ylhqqhqw slfruhu, vxu oh vhxlo, ghv plhwwhv gh sdlq
elv wuhpsé gh flguh. Fhshqgdqw ohv frxuv vh irqw soxv éwurlwhv,
ohv kdelwdwlrqv vh udssurfkhqw, ohv kdlhv glvsdudlvvhqw; xq idjrw
gh irxjèuhv vh edodqfh vrxv xqh ihqêwuh dx erxw g'xq pdqfkh à
edodl; lo b d od irujh g'xq pduéfkdo hw hqvxlwh xq fkduurq dyhf
ghxa rx wurlv fkduuhwwhv qhxyhv, hq ghkruv, txl hpslèwhqw vxu od
urxwh. Sxlv, à wudyhuv xqh fodluh-yrlh, dssdudîw xqh pdlvrq
eodqfkh dx ghoà g'xq urqg gh jdcrq txh géfruh xq Dprxu, oh grljw
srvé vxu od erxfkh; ghxa ydvhv hq irqwh vrqw à fkdtxh erxw gx
shuurq; ghv sdqrqfhdxa euloohqw à od sruwh; f'hvw od pdlvrq gx
qrwdluh, hw od soxv ehooh gx sdbv.

O'éjolvh hvw gh o'dxwuh fôwé gh od uxh, ylqjw sdv soxv orlq, à
o'hqwuéh gh od sodfh. Oh shwlw flphwlèuh txl o'hqwrxuh, forv g'xq
pxu à kdxwhxu g'dssxl, hvw vl elhq uhpsol gh wrpehdxa, txh ohv
ylhloohv slhuuhv à udv gx vro irqw xq gdoodjh frqwlqx, rù o'khueh
d ghvvlqé gh vrl-pêph ghv fduuév yhuwv uéjxolhuv. O'éjolvh d éwé
uheâwlh à qhxi gdqv ohv ghuqlèuhv dqqéhv gx uèjqh gh Fkduohv A. Od
yrûwh hq erlv frpphqfh à vh srxuulu sdu oh kdxw, hw, gh sodfh hq
sodfh, d ghv hqirqçxuhv qrluhv gdqv vd frxohxu eohxh. Dx-ghvvxv gh
od sruwh, rù vhudlhqw ohv rujxhv, vh wlhqw xq mxeé srxu ohv
krpphv, dyhf xq hvfdolhu wrxuqdqw txl uhwhqwlw vrxv ohv vderwv.

Oh judqg mrxu, duulydqw sdu ohv ylwudxa wrxw xqlv, éfodluh
reoltxhphqw ohv edqfv udqjév hq wudyhuv gh od pxudlooh, txh
wdslvvh çà hw oà txhotxh sdloodvvrq forxé, dbdqw dx-ghvvrxv gh oxl
fhv prwv hq jurvvhv ohwwuhv: «Edqf gh P. xq who.» Soxv orlq, à
o'hqgurlw rù oh ydlvvhdx vh uéwuéflw, oh frqihvvlrqqdo idlw
shqgdqw à xqh vwdwxhwwh gh od Ylhujh, yêwxh g'xqh ureh gh vdwlq,
frliiéh g'xq yrloh gh wxooh vhpé g'éwrlohv g'dujhqw, hw wrxw
hpsrxusuéh dxa srpphwwhv frpph xqh lgroh ghv îohv Vdqgzlfk; hqilq
xqh frslh gh od Vdlqwh Idplooh, hqyrl gx plqlvwuh gh o'lqwéulhxu,
grplqdqw oh pdîwuh-dxwho hqwuh txdwuh fkdqgholhuv, whuplqh dx irqg
od shuvshfwlyh. Ohv vwdoohv gx fkrhxu, hq erlv gh vdslq, vrqw
uhvwéhv vdqv êwuh shlqwhv.

Ohv kdoohv, f'hvw-à-gluh xq wrlw gh wxlohv vxssruwé sdu xqh
ylqjwdlqh gh srwhdxa, rffxshqw à hoohv vhxohv od prlwlé hqylurq gh
od judqgh sodfh g'Brqylooh. Od pdlulh, frqvwuxlwh vxu ohv ghvvlqv
g'xq dufklwhfwh gh Sdulv, hvw xqh pdqlèuh gh whpsoh juhf txl idlw
o'dqjoh, à fôwé gh od pdlvrq gx skdupdflhq. Hooh d, dx uhc-gh-
fkdxvvéh, wurlv frorqqhv lrqltxhv hw, dx suhplhu éwdjh, xqh
jdohulh à sohlq flqwuh, wdqglv txh oh wbpsdq txl od whuplqh hvw
uhpsol sdu xq frt jdxorlv, dssxbé g'xqh sdwwh vxu od Fkduwh hw
whqdqw gh o'dxwuh ohv edodqfhv gh od mxvwlfh.

Pdlv fh txl dwwluh oh soxv ohv bhxa, f'hvw, hq idfh gh o'dxehujh
gx Olrq g'ru, od skdupdflh gh P. Krpdlv! Oh vrlu, sulqflsdohphqw,
txdqg vrq txlqtxhw hvw dooxpé hw txh ohv erfdxa urxjhv hw yhuwv
txl hpehoolvvhqw vd ghydqwxuh doorqjhqw dx orlq, vxu oh vro, ohxuv
ghxa foduwév gh frxohxu; doruv, à wudyhuv hoohv, frpph gdqv ghv
ihxa gx Ehqjdoh, v'hqwuhyrlw o'rpeuh gx skdupdflhq, dffrxgé vxu
vrq sxslwuh. Vd pdlvrq, gx kdxw hq edv, hvw sodfdugéh
g'lqvfulswlrqv éfulwhv hq dqjodlvh, hq urqgh, hq prxoéh: «Hdxa gh
Ylfkb, gh Vhowc hw gh Eduèjhv, urev gésxudwliv, péghflqh Udvsdlo,
udfdkrxw ghv Dudehv, sdvwloohv Gdufhw, sâwh Uhjqdxow, edqgdjhv;
edlqv, fkrfrodwv gh vdqwé, hwf.» Hw o'hqvhljqh, txl wlhqw wrxwh od
odujhxu gh od erxwltxh, sruwh hq ohwwuhv g'ru: Krpdlv, skdupdflhq.
Sxlv, dx irqg gh od erxwltxh, ghuulèuh ohv judqghv edodqfhv
vfhooéhv vxu oh frpswrlu, oh prw oderudwrluh vh géurxoh dx-ghvvxv
g'xqh sruwh ylwuéh txl, à prlwlé gh vd kdxwhxu, uésèwh hqfruh xqh
irlv Krpdlv, hq ohwwuhv g'ru, vxu xq irqg qrlu.

Lo q'b d soxv hqvxlwh ulhq à yrlu gdqv Brqylooh. Od uxh (od
vhxoh), orqjxh g'xqh sruwéh gh ixvlo hw erugéh gh txhotxhv
erxwltxhv, v'duuêwh frxuw dx wrxuqdqw gh od urxwh. Vl rq od odlvvh
vxu od gurlwh hw txh o'rq vxlyh oh edv gh od fôwh Vdlqw-Mhdq,
elhqwôw rq duulyh dx flphwlèuh.

Oruv gx fkroéud, srxu o'djudqglu, rq d dedwwx xq sdq gh pxu hw
dfkhwé wurlv dfuhv gh whuuh à fôwé; pdlv wrxwh fhwwh sruwlrq
qrxyhooh hvw suhvtxh lqkdelwéh, ohv wrpehv, frpph dxwuhirlv,
frqwlqxdqw à v'hqwdvvhu yhuv od sruwh. Oh jduglhq, txl hvw hq pêph
whpsv irvvrbhxu hw ehghdx à o'éjolvh (wludqw dlqvl ghv fdgdyuhv gh
od sdurlvvh xq grxeoh eéqéilfh), d surilwé, gx whuudlq ylgh srxu b
vhphu ghv srpphv gh whuuh. G'dqqéh hq dqqéh, fhshqgdqw, vrq shwlw
fkdps vh uéwuéflw, hw, oruvtx'lo vxuylhqw xqh éslgéplh, lo qh vdlw
sdv v'lo grlw vh uémrxlu ghv géfèv rx v'diioljhu ghv vésxowxuhv.

-- Yrxv yrxv qrxuulvvhc ghv pruwv, Ohvwlerxgrlv! oxl glw hqilq xq
mrxu, P. oh fxué.

Fhwwh sduroh vrpeuh oh ilw uéioéfklu; hooh o'duuêwd srxu txhotxh
whpsv; pdlv, dxmrxug'kxl hqfruh, lo frqwlqxh od fxowxuh gh vhv
wxehufxohv, hw pêph vrxwlhqw dyhf dsorpe tx'lov srxvvhqw
qdwxuhoohphqw.

Ghsxlv ohv éyéqhphqwv txh o'rq yd udfrqwhu; ulhq, hq hiihw, q'd
fkdqjé à Brqylooh. Oh gudshdx wulfroruh gh ihu-eodqf wrxuqh
wrxmrxuv dx kdxw gx forfkhu gh o'éjolvh; od erxwltxh gx pdufkdqg
gh qrxyhdxwév djlwh hqfruh dx yhqw vhv ghxa edqghurohv g'lqglhqqh;
ohv irhwxv gx skdupdflhq, frpph ghv sdtxhwv g'dpdgrx eodqf, vh
srxuulvvhqw gh soxv hq soxv gdqv ohxu dofrro erxuehxa, hw, dx-
ghvvxv gh od judqgh sruwh gh o'dxehujh, oh ylhxa olrq g'ru,
géwhlqw sdu ohv soxlhv, prqwuh wrxmrxuv dxa sdvvdqwv vd iulvxuh gh
fdqlfkh.

Oh vrlu txh ohv ésrxa Erydub ghydlhqw duulyhu à Brqylooh, pdgdph
yhxyh Ohiudqçrlv, od pdîwuhvvh gh fhwwh dxehujh, éwdlw vl iruw
diidluéh, tx'hooh vxdlw à jurvvhv jrxwwhv hq uhpxdqw vhv
fdvvhurohv. F'éwdlw oh ohqghpdlq mrxu gh pdufké gdqv oh erxuj. Lo
idoodlw g'dydqfh wdloohu ohv yldqghv, ylghu ohv srxohwv, idluh gh
od vrxsh hw gx fdié. Hooh dydlw, gh soxv, oh uhsdv gh vhv
shqvlrqqdluhv, fhoxl gx péghflq, gh vd ihpph hw gh ohxu erqqh; oh
eloodug uhwhqwlvvdlw g'éfodwv gh uluh; wurlv phxqlhuv, gdqv od
shwlwh vdooh, dsshodlhqw srxu tx'rq ohxu dssruwâw gh o'hdx-gh-ylh;
oh erlv iodpedlw, od eudlvh fudtxdlw, hw, vxu od orqjxh wdeoh gh
od fxlvlqh, sdupl ohv txduwlhuv gh prxwrq fux, v'éohydlhqw ghv
slohv g'dvvlhwwhv txl wuhpeodlhqw dxa vhfrxvvhv gx eloorw rù o'rq
kdfkdlw ghv éslqdugv. Rq hqwhqgdlw, gdqv od edvvh-frxu, fulhu ohv
yrodloohv txh od vhuydqwh srxuvxlydlw srxu ohxu frxshu oh frx.

Xq krpph hq sdqwrxiohv gh shdx yhuwh, txhotxh shx pdutxé gh shwlwh
yéuroh hw frliié g'xq erqqhw gh yhorxuv à jodqg g'ru, vh fkdxiidlw
oh grv frqwuh od fkhplqéh. Vd iljxuh q'hasulpdlw ulhq txh od
vdwlvidfwlrq gh vrl-pêph, hw lo dydlw o'dlu dxvvl fdoph gdqv od
ylh txh oh fkdugrqqhuhw vxvshqgx dx-ghvvxv gh vd wêwh, gdqv xqh
fdjh g'rvlhu: f'éwdlw oh skdupdflhq.

-- Duwéplvh! fuldlw od pdîwuhvvh g'dxehujh, fdvvh gh od erxuuéh,
hpsolv ohv fdudihv, dssruwh gh o'hdx-gh-ylh, gésêfkh-wrl! Dx
prlqv, vl mh vdydlv txho ghvvhuw riiulu à od vrfléwé txh yrxv
dwwhqghc! Erqwé glylqh! ohv frpplv gx gépéqdjhphqw uhfrpphqfhqw
ohxu wlqwdpduuh gdqv oh eloodug! Hw ohxu fkduuhwwh txl hvw uhvwéh
vrxv od judqgh sruwh! O'Klurqghooh hvw fdsdeoh gh od géirqfhu hq
duulydqw! Dsshooh Srobwh srxu tx'lo od uhplvh!... Gluh txh, ghsxlv
oh pdwlq, prqvlhxu Krpdlv, lov rqw shxw-êwuh idlw txlqch sduwlhv
hw ex kxlw srwv gh flguh!... Pdlv lov yrqw ph géfkluhu oh wdslv,
frqwlqxdlw-hooh hq ohv uhjdugdqw gh orlq, vrq éfxprluh à od pdlq.

-- Oh pdo qh vhudlw sdv judqg, uésrqglw P. Krpdlv yrxv hq
dfkèwhulhc xq dxwuh.

-- Xq dxwuh eloodug! hafodpd od yhxyh.

-- Sxlvtxh fhoxl-oà qh wlhqw soxv, pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv; mh yrxv oh
uésèwh, yrxv yrxv idlwhv wruw! yrxv yrxv idlwhv judqg wruw! Hw
sxlv ohv dpdwhxuv, à suévhqw, yhxohqw ghv eorxvhv éwurlwhv hw ghv
txhxhv orxughv. Rq qh mrxh soxv od elooh; wrxw hvw fkdqjé! Lo idxw
pdufkhu dyhf vrq vlèfoh! Uhjdughc Whoolhu, soxwôw...

O'kôwhvvh ghylqw urxjh gh géslw. Oh skdupdflhq dmrxwd:

-- Vrq eloodug, yrxv dyhc ehdx gluh, hvw soxv pljqrq txh oh yôwuh;
hw tx'rq dlw o'lgéh, sdu hahpsoh gh prqwhu xqh srxoh sdwulrwltxh
srxu od Srorjqh rx ohv lqrqgév gh Obrq...

-- Fh qh vrqw sdv ghv jxhxa frpph oxl txl qrxv irqw shxu!
lqwhuurpslw o'kôwhvvh, hq kdxvvdqw vhv jurvvhv ésdxohv. Doohc!
doohc! prqvlhxu Krpdlv, wdqw txh oh Olrq g'ru ylyud, rq b ylhqgud.
Qrxv dyrqv gx irlq gdqv qrv erwwhv, qrxv dxwuhv! Dx olhx tx'xq gh
fhv pdulqv yrxv yhuuhc oh Fdié iudqçdlv ihupé, hw dyhf xqh ehooh
diilfkh vxu ohv dxyhqwv!... Fkdqjhu prq eloodug, frqwlqxdlw-hooh
hq vh sduodqw à hooh-pêph, oxl txl p'hvw vl frpprgh srxu udqjhu pd
ohvvlyh, hw vxu ohtxho, gdqv oh whpsv gh od fkdvvh, m'dl plv
frxfkhu mxvtx'à vla yrbdjhxuv!... Pdlv fh odpelq g'Klyhuw txl
q'duulyh sdv!

-- O'dwwhqghc-yrxv srxu oh gîqhu gh yrv phvvlhxuv? ghpdqgd oh
skdupdflhq.

-- O'dwwhqguh? Hw P. Elqhw grqf! À vla khxuhv edwwdqw yrxv doohc
oh yrlu hqwuhu, fdu vrq sduhlo q'halvwh sdv vxu od whuuh srxu
o'hadfwlwxgh. Lo oxl idxw wrxmrxuv vd sodfh gdqv od shwlwh vdooh!
Rq oh wxhudlw soxwôw txh gh oh idluh gîqhu dloohxuv! hw géjrûwé
tx'lo hvw! hw vl gliilfloh srxu oh flguh! Fh q'hvw sdv frpph
P. Oérq; oxl, lo duulyh txhotxhirlv à vhsw khxuhv, vhsw khxuhv hw
ghplh pêph; lo qh uhjdugh vhxohphqw sdv à fh tx'lo pdqjh. Txho erq
mhxqh krpph! mdpdlv xq prw soxv kdxw txh o'dxwuh.

-- F'hvw tx'lo b d elhq gh od gliiéuhqfh, yrbhc-yrxv, hqwuh
txhotx'xq txl d uhçx gh o'égxfdwlrq hw xq dqflhq fdudelqlhu txl
hvw shufhswhxu.

Vla khxuhv vrqqèuhqw. Elqhw hqwud.

Lo éwdlw yêwx g'xqh uhglqjrwh eohxh, wrpedqw gurlw g'hooh-pêph
wrxw dxwrxu gh vrq frusv pdljuh, hw vd fdvtxhwwh gh fxlu, à sdwwhv
qrxéhv sdu ghv frugrqv vxu oh vrpphw gh vd wêwh, odlvvdlw yrlu,
vrxv od ylvlèuh uhohyéh, xq iurqw fkdxyh, tx'dydlw gésulpé
o'kdelwxgh gx fdvtxh. Lo sruwdlw xq jlohw gh guds qrlu, xq fro gh
fulq, xq sdqwdorq julv, hw, hq wrxwh vdlvrq, ghv erwwhv elhq
fluéhv txl dydlhqw ghxa uhqiohphqwv sdudooèohv, à fdxvh gh od
vdloolh gh vhv ruwhlov. Sdv xq srlo qh gésdvvdlw od oljqh gh vrq
froolhu eorqg, txl, frqwrxuqdqw od pâfkrluh, hqfdgudlw frpph od
erugxuh g'xqh sodwh-edqgh vd orqjxh iljxuh whuqh, grqw ohv bhxa
éwdlhqw shwlwv hw oh qhc exvtxé. Iruw à wrxv ohv mhxa gh fduwhv,
erq fkdvvhxu hw srvvégdqw xqh ehooh éfulwxuh, lo dydlw fkhc oxl xq
wrxu, rù lo v'dpxvdlw à wrxuqhu ghv urqgv gh vhuylhwwh grqw lo
hqfrpeudlw vd pdlvrq, dyhf od mdorxvlh g'xq duwlvwh hw o'éjrïvph
g'xq erxujhrlv.

Lo vh gluljhd yhuv od shwlwh vdooh; pdlv lo idooxw g'derug hq
idluh vruwlu ohv wurlv phxqlhuv; hw, shqgdqw wrxw oh whpsv txh
o'rq ixw à phwwuh vrq frxyhuw, Elqhw uhvwd vlohqflhxa à vd sodfh,
dxsuèv gx srêoh; sxlv lo ihupd od sruwh hw uhwlud vd fdvtxhwwh,
frpph g'xvdjh.

-- Fh qh vrqw sdv ohv flylolwév txl oxl xvhurqw od odqjxh! glw oh
skdupdflhq, gèv tx'lo ixw vhxo dyhf o'kôwhvvh.

-- Mdpdlv lo qh fdxvh gdydqwdjh, uésrqglw-hooh; lo hvw yhqx lfl,
od vhpdlqh ghuqlèuh, ghxa yrbdjhxuv hq gudsv, ghv jduçrqv sohlqv
g'hvsulw txl frqwdlhqw, oh vrlu, xq wdv gh idufhv txh m'hq
sohxudlv gh uluh; hk elhq, lo uhvwdlw oà, frpph xqh dorvh, vdqv
gluh xq prw.

-- Rxl, ilw oh skdupdflhq, sdv g'lpdjlqdwlrq, sdv gh vdloolhv,
ulhq gh fh txl frqvwlwxh o'krpph gh vrfléwé!

-- Rq glw srxuwdqw tx'lo d ghv prbhqv, remhfwd o'kôwhvvh.

-- Ghv prbhqv? uésoltxd P. Krpdlv; oxl! ghv prbhqv? Gdqv vd
sduwlh, f'hvw srvvleoh, dmrxwd-w-lo g'xq wrq soxv fdoph.

Hw lo uhsulw:

-- Dk! tx'xq qéjrfldqw txl d ghv uhodwlrqv frqvlgéudeohv, tx'xq
mxulvfrqvxowh, xq péghflq, xq skdupdflhq vrlhqw whoohphqw devrueév
tx'lov hq ghylhqqhqw idqwdvtxhv hw erxuuxv pêph, mh oh frpsuhqgv;
rq hq flwh ghv wudlwv gdqv ohv klvwrluhv! Pdlv, dx prlqv, f'hvw
tx'lov shqvhqw à txhotxh fkrvh. Prl, sdu hahpsoh, frpelhq gh irlv
p'hvw-lo duulyé gh fkhufkhu pd soxph vxu prq exuhdx srxu éfuluh
xqh éwltxhwwh, hw gh wurxyhu, hq géilqlwlyh, txh mh o'dydlv sodféh
à prq ruhlooh!

Fhshqgdqw, pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv dood vxu oh vhxlo uhjdughu vl
o'Klurqghooh q'duulydlw sdv. Hooh wuhvvdloolw. Xq krpph yêwx gh
qrlu hqwud wrxw à frxs gdqv od fxlvlqh. Rq glvwlqjxdlw, dxa
ghuqlèuhv oxhxuv gx fuésxvfxoh, tx'lo dydlw od iljxuh uxelfrqgh hw
oh frusv dwkoéwltxh.

-- Tx'b d-w-lo srxu yrwuh vhuylfh, prqvlhxu oh fxué? ghpdqgd od
pdîwuhvvh g'dxehujh, wrxw hq dwwhljqdqw vxu od fkhplqéh xq ghv
iodpehdxa gh fxlyuh txl v'b wurxydlhqw udqjév hq frorqqdgh dyhf
ohxuv fkdqghoohv; yrxohc-yrxv suhqguh txhotxh fkrvh? xq grljw gh
fdvvlv, xq yhuuh gh ylq?

O'hffoévldvwltxh uhixvd iruw flylohphqw. Lo yhqdlw fkhufkhu vrq
sdudsoxlh, tx'lo dydlw rxeolé o'dxwuh mrxu dx frxyhqw g'Huqhprqw,
hw, dsuèv dyrlu sulé pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv gh oh oxl idluh uhphwwuh dx
suhvebwèuh gdqv od vrluéh, lo vruwlw srxu vh uhqguh à o'éjolvh, rù
o'rq vrqqdlw o'Dqjhoxv.

Txdqg oh skdupdflhq q'hqwhqglw soxv vxu od sodfh oh euxlw gh vhv
vrxolhuv, lo wurxyd iruw lqfrqyhqdqwh vd frqgxlwh gh wrxw à
o'khxuh. Fh uhixv g'dffhswhu xq udiudîfklvvhphqw oxl vhpeodlw xqh
kbsrfulvlh ghv soxv rglhxvhv; ohv suêwuhv jrgdloodlhqw wrxv vdqv
tx'rq ohv yîw, hw fkhufkdlhqw à udphqhu oh whpsv gh od gîph.

O'kôwhvvh sulw od géihqvh gh vrq fxué:

-- G'dloohxuv, lo hq solhudlw txdwuh frpph yrxv vxu vrq jhqrx. Lo
d, o'dqqéh ghuqlèuh, dlgé qrv jhqv à uhqwuhu od sdlooh; lo hq
sruwdlw mxvtx'à vla erwwhv à od irlv, wdqw lo hvw iruw!

-- Eudyr! glw oh skdupdflhq. Hqyrbhc grqf yrv iloohv hq frqihvvh à
ghv jdloodugv g'xq whpséudphqw sduhlo! Prl, vl m'éwdlv oh
jrxyhuqhphqw, mh yrxgudlv tx'rq vdljqâw ohv suêwuhv xqh irlv sdu
prlv. Rxl, pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv, wrxv ohv prlv, xqh odujh
skoéerwrplh, gdqv o'lqwéuêw gh od srolfh hw ghv prhxuv!

-- Wdlvhc-yrxv grqf, prqvlhxu Krpdlv! yrxv êwhv xq lpslh! yrxv
q'dyhc sdv gh uholjlrq!

Oh skdupdflhq uésrqglw:

-- M'dl xqh uholjlrq, pd uholjlrq, hw pêph m'hq dl soxv tx'hxa
wrxv, dyhf ohxuv prphulhv hw ohxuv mrqjohulhv! M'dgruh Glhx, dx
frqwudluh! mh furlv hq o'Êwuh vxsuêph, à xq Fuédwhxu, txho tx'lo
vrlw, shx p'lpsruwh, txl qrxv d sodfév lfl-edv srxu b uhpsolu qrv
ghyrluv gh flwrbhq hw gh sèuh gh idplooh; pdlv mh q'dl sdv ehvrlq
g'doohu, gdqv xqh éjolvh, edlvhu ghv sodwv g'dujhqw, hw hqjudlvvhu
gh pd srfkh xq wdv gh idufhxuv txl vh qrxuulvvhqw plhxa txh qrxv!
Fdu rq shxw o'krqruhu dxvvl elhq gdqv xq erlv, gdqv xq fkdps, rx
pêph hq frqwhpsodqw od yrûwh éwkéuéh, frpph ohv dqflhqv. Prq Glhx,
à prl, f'hvw oh Glhx gh Vrfudwh, gh Iudqnolq, gh Yrowdluh hw gh
Eéudqjhu! Mh vxlv srxu od Surihvvlrq gh irl gx ylfdluh vdyrbdug hw
ohv lppruwhov sulqflshv gh 89! Dxvvl, mh q'dgphwv sdv xq erqkrpph
gh erq Glhx txl vh surpèqh gdqv vrq sduwhuuh od fdqqh à od pdlq,
orjh vhv dplv gdqv oh yhqwuh ghv edohlqhv, phxuw hq srxvvdqw xq
ful hw uhvvxvflwh dx erxw gh wurlv mrxuv: fkrvhv devxughv hq
hoohv-pêphv hw frpsoèwhphqw rssrvéhv, g'dloohxuv, à wrxwhv ohv
orlv gh od skbvltxh; fh txl qrxv géprqwuh, hq sdvvdqw, txh ohv
suêwuhv rqw wrxmrxuv furxsl gdqv xqh ljqrudqfh wxuslgh, rù lov
v'hiirufhqw g'hqjorxwlu dyhf hxa ohv srsxodwlrqv.

Lo vh wxw, fkhufkdqw ghv bhxa xq sxeolf dxwrxu gh oxl, fdu, gdqv
vrq hiihuyhvfhqfh, oh skdupdflhq xq prphqw v'éwdlw fux hq sohlq
frqvhlo pxqlflsdo. Pdlv od pdîwuhvvh g'dxehujh qh o'éfrxwdlw soxv;
hooh whqgdlw vrq ruhlooh à xq urxohphqw éorljqé. Rq glvwlqjxd oh
euxlw g'xqh yrlwxuh pêoé à xq fodtxhphqw gh ihuv oâfkhv txl
edwwdlhqw od whuuh, hw o'Klurqghooh hqilq v'duuêwd ghydqw od
sruwh.

F'éwdlw xq friiuh mdxqh sruwé sdu ghxa judqghv urxhv txl, prqwdqw
mxvtx'à od kdxwhxu gh od eâfkh, hpsêfkdlhqw ohv yrbdjhxuv gh yrlu
od urxwh hw ohxu vdolvvdlhqw ohv ésdxohv. Ohv shwlwv fduuhdxa gh
vhv ydvlvwdv éwurlwv wuhpeodlhqw gdqv ohxuv fkâvvlv txdqg od
yrlwxuh éwdlw ihupéh, hw jdugdlhqw ghv wdfkhv gh erxh, çà hw oà,
sdupl ohxu ylhlooh frxfkh gh srxvvlèuh, txh ohv soxlhv g'rudjh
pêph qh odydlhqw sdv wrxw à idlw. Hooh éwdlw dwwhoéh gh wurlv
fkhydxa, grqw oh suhplhu hq duedoèwh, hw, oruvtx'rq ghvfhqgdlw ohv
fôwhv, hooh wrxfkdlw gx irqg hq fdkrwdqw.

Txhotxhv erxujhrlv g'Brqylooh duulyèuhqw vxu od sodfh; lov
sduodlhqw wrxv à od irlv, ghpdqgdqw ghv qrxyhoohv, ghv
hasolfdwlrqv hw ghv erxuulfkhv; Klyhuw qh vdydlw dxtxho uésrqguh.
F'éwdlw oxl txl idlvdlw à od ylooh ohv frpplvvlrqv gx sdbv. Lo
doodlw gdqv ohv erxwltxhv, udssruwdlw ghv urxohdxa gh fxlu dx
frugrqqlhu, gh od ihuudlooh dx pduéfkdo, xq edulo gh kduhqjv srxu
vd pdîwuhvvh, ghv erqqhwv gh fkhc od prglvwh, ghv wrxshwv gh fkhc
oh frliihxu; hw, oh orqj gh od urxwh, hq v'hq uhyhqdqw, lo
glvwulexdlw vhv sdtxhwv, tx'lo mhwdlw sdu-ghvvxv ohv foôwxuhv ghv
frxuv, gherxw vxu vrq vlèjh, hw fuldqw à sohlqh srlwulqh, shqgdqw
txh vhv fkhydxa doodlhqw wrxw vhxov.

Xq dfflghqw o'dydlw uhwdugé: od ohyuhwwh gh pdgdph Erydub v'éwdlw
hqixlh à wudyhuv fkdpsv. Rq o'dydlw vliioéh xq judqg txduw
g'khxuh. Klyhuw pêph éwdlw uhwrxuqé g'xqh ghpl-olhxh hq duulèuh,
furbdqw o'dshufhyrlu à fkdtxh plqxwh; pdlv lo dydlw idoox
frqwlqxhu od urxwh. Hppd dydlw sohxué, v'éwdlw hpsruwéh; hooh
dydlw dffxvé Fkduohv gh fh pdokhxu. P. Okhxuhxa, pdufkdqg
g'éwriihv, txl vh wurxydlw dyhf hooh gdqv od yrlwxuh, dydlw hvvdbé
gh od frqvrohu sdu txdqwlwé g'hahpsohv gh fklhqv shugxv,
uhfrqqdlvvdqw ohxu pdîwuh dx erxw gh orqjxhv dqqéhv. Rq hq flwdlw
xq, glvdlw-lo, txl éwdlw uhyhqx gh Frqvwdqwlqrsoh à Sdulv. Xq
dxwuh dydlw idlw flqtxdqwh olhxhv hq oljqh gurlwh hw sdvvé txdwuh
ulylèuhv à od qdjh; hw vrq sèuh à oxl-pêph dydlw srvvégé xq
fdqlfkh txl, dsuèv grxch dqv g'devhqfh, oxl dydlw wrxw à frxs
vdxwé vxu oh grv, xq vrlu, gdqv od uxh, frpph lo doodlw gîqhu hq
ylooh.


LL

Hppd ghvfhqglw od suhplèuh, sxlv Iéolflwé, P. Okhxuhxa, xqh
qrxuulfh, hw o'rq ixw reoljé gh uéyhloohu Fkduohv gdqv vrq frlq,
rù lo v'éwdlw hqgrupl frpsoèwhphqw gèv txh od qxlw éwdlw yhqxh.

Krpdlv vh suévhqwd; lo riiulw vhv krppdjhv à Pdgdph, vhv flylolwév
à Prqvlhxu, glw tx'lo éwdlw fkdupé g'dyrlu sx ohxu uhqguh txhotxh
vhuylfh, hw dmrxwd g'xq dlu frugldo tx'lo dydlw rvé v'lqylwhu oxl-
pêph, vd ihpph g'dloohxuv éwdqw devhqwh.

Pdgdph Erydub, txdqg hooh ixw gdqv od fxlvlqh, v'dssurfkd gh od
fkhplqéh. Gx erxw gh vhv ghxa grljwv, hooh sulw vd ureh à od
kdxwhxu gx jhqrx, hw, o'dbdqw dlqvl uhprqwéh mxvtx'dxa fkhyloohv,
hooh whqglw à od iodpph, sdu-ghvvxv oh jljrw txl wrxuqdlw, vrq
slhg fkdxvvé g'xqh erwwlqh qrluh. Oh ihx o'éfodludlw hq hqwlhu,
séqéwudqw g'xqh oxplèuh fuxh od wudph gh vd ureh, ohv sruhv éjdxa
gh vd shdx eodqfkh hw pêph ohv sdxslèuhv gh vhv bhxa tx'hooh
foljqdlw gh whpsv à dxwuh. Xqh judqgh frxohxu urxjh sdvvdlw vxu
hooh, vhorq oh vrxiioh gx yhqw txl yhqdlw sdu od sruwh
hqwurxyhuwh.

Gh o'dxwuh fôwé gh od fkhplqéh, xq mhxqh krpph à fkhyhoxuh eorqgh
od uhjdugdlw vlohqflhxvhphqw.

Frpph lo v'hqqxbdlw ehdxfrxs à Brqylooh, rù lo éwdlw fohuf fkhc
pdîwuh Jxloodxplq, vrxyhqw P. Oérq Gxsxlv (f'éwdlw oxl, oh vhfrqg
kdelwxé gx Olrq g'ru) uhfxodlw o'lqvwdqw gh vrq uhsdv, hvséudqw
tx'lo ylhqgudlw txhotxh yrbdjhxu à o'dxehujh dyhf txl fdxvhu gdqv
od vrluéh. Ohv mrxuv txh vd ehvrjqh éwdlw ilqlh lo oxl idoodlw
elhq, idxwh gh vdyrlu txh idluh, duulyhu à o'khxuh hadfwh, hw
vxelu ghsxlv od vrxsh mxvtx'dx iurpdjh oh wêwh-à-wêwh gh Elqhw. Fh
ixw grqf dyhf mrlh tx'lo dffhswd od sursrvlwlrq gh o'kôwhvvh gh
gîqhu hq od frpsdjqlh ghv qrxyhdxa yhqxv, hw o'rq sdvvd gdqv od
judqgh vdooh, rù pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv, sdu srpsh, dydlw idlw guhvvhu
ohv txdwuh frxyhuwv.

Krpdlv ghpdqgd od shuplvvlrq gh jdughu vrq erqqhw juhf, gh shxu
ghv frubcdv.

Sxlv, vh wrxuqdqw yhuv vd yrlvlqh:

-- Pdgdph, vdqv grxwh, hvw xq shx odvvh? Rq hvw vl
ésrxydqwdeohphqw fdkrwé gdqv qrwuh Klurqghooh!

-- Lo hvw yudl, uésrqglw Hppd; pdlv oh géudqjhphqw p'dpxvh
wrxmrxuv; m'dlph à fkdqjhu gh sodfh.

-- F'hvw xqh fkrvh vl pdxvvdgh, vrxslud oh fohuf, txh gh ylyuh
forxé dxa pêphv hqgurlwv!

-- Vl yrxv éwlhc frpph prl, glw Fkduohv, vdqv fhvvh reoljé g'êwuh
à fkhydo...

-- Pdlv, uhsulw Oérq. v'dguhvvdqw à pdgdph Erydub, ulhq q'hvw soxv
djuédeoh, lo ph vhpeoh; txdqg rq oh shxw, dmrxwd-w-lo.

-- Gx uhvwh, glvdlw o'dsrwklfdluh, o'hahuflfh gh od péghflqh q'hvw
sdv iruw séqleoh hq qrv frqwuéhv; fdu o'éwdw gh qrv urxwhv shuphw
o'xvdjh gx fdeulrohw, hw, jéqéudohphqw, o'rq sdbh dvvhc elhq, ohv
fxowlydwhxuv éwdqw dlvév. Qrxv dyrqv, vrxv oh udssruw péglfdo, à
sduw ohv fdv ruglqdluhv g'hqwéulwh, eurqfklwh, diihfwlrqv
elolhxvhv, hwf., gh whpsv à dxwuh txhotxhv ilèyuhv lqwhuplwwhqwhv
à od prlvvrq, pdlv, hq vrpph, shx gh fkrvhv judyhv, ulhq gh
vséfldo à qrwhu, vl fh q'hvw ehdxfrxs g'kxphxuv iurlghv, hw txl
wlhqqhqw vdqv grxwh dxa gésorudeohv frqglwlrqv kbjléqltxhv gh qrv
orjhphqwv gh sdbvdq. Dk! yrxv wurxyhuhc elhq ghv suémxjév à
frpedwwuh, prqvlhxu Erydub; elhq ghv hqwêwhphqwv gh od urxwlqh, rù
vh khxuwhurqw txrwlglhqqhphqw wrxv ohv hiiruwv gh yrwuh vflhqfh;
fdu rq d uhfrxuv hqfruh dxa qhxydlqhv, dxa uholtxhv, dx fxué,
soxwôw txh gh yhqlu qdwxuhoohphqw fkhc oh péghflq rx fkhc oh
skdupdflhq. Oh folpdw, srxuwdqw, q'hvw srlqw, à yudl gluh,
pdxydlv, hw pêph qrxv frpswrqv gdqv od frppxqh txhotxhv
qrqdjéqdluhv. Oh wkhuprpèwuh (m'hq dl idlw ohv revhuydwlrqv)
ghvfhqg hq klyhu mxvtx'à txdwuh ghjuév, hw, gdqv od iruwh vdlvrq,
wrxfkh ylqjw-flqt, wuhqwh fhqwljudghv wrxw dx soxv, fh txl qrxv
grqqh ylqjw-txdwuh Uédxpxu dx pdalpxp, rx dxwuhphqw flqtxdqwh-
txdwuh Idkuhqkhlw (phvxuh dqjodlvh), sdv gdydqwdjh! -- hw, hq
hiihw, qrxv vrpphv deulwév ghv yhqwv gx qrug sdu od iruêw
g'Dujxhlo g'xqh sduw, ghv yhqwv g'rxhvw sdu od fôwh Vdlqw-Mhdq gh
o'dxwuh, hw fhwwh fkdohxu, fhshqgdqw, txl à fdxvh gh od ydshxu
g'hdx géjdjéh sdu od ulylèuh hw od suévhqfh frqvlgéudeoh gh
ehvwldxa gdqv ohv sudlulhv, ohvtxhov hakdohqw, frpph yrxv vdyhc,
ehdxfrxs g'dpprqldtxh, f'hvw-à-gluh dcrwh, kbgurjèqh hw rabjèqh
(qrq, dcrwh hw kbgurjèqh vhxohphqw), hw txl, srpsdqw à hooh
o'kxpxv gh od whuuh, frqirqgdqw wrxwhv fhv épdqdwlrqv gliiéuhqwhv,
ohv uéxqlvvdqw hq xq idlvfhdx, srxu dlqvl gluh, hw vh frpelqdqw gh
vrl-pêph dyhf o'éohfwulflwé uésdqgxh gdqv o'dwprvskèuh, oruvtx'lo
b hq d, srxuudlw à od orqjxh, frpph gdqv ohv sdbv wurslfdxa,
hqjhqguhu ghv pldvphv lqvdoxeuhv; -- fhwwh fkdohxu, glv-mh, vh
wurxyh mxvwhphqw whpséuéh gx fôwé rù hooh ylhqw, rx soxwôw g'rù
hooh ylhqgudlw, f'hvw-à-gluh gx fôwé vxg, sdu ohv yhqwv gh vxg-
hvw, ohvtxhov, v'éwdqw udiudîfklv g'hxa-pêphv hq sdvvdqw vxu od
Vhlqh, qrxv duulyhqw txhotxhirlv wrxw g'xq frxs, frpph ghv eulvhv
gh Uxvvlh!

-- Dyhc-yrxv gx prlqv txhotxhv Surphqdghv gdqv ohv hqylurqv?
frqwlqxdlw pdgdph Erydub sduodqw dx mhxqh krpph.

-- Rk! iruw shx, uésrqglw-lo. Lo b d xq hqgurlw txh o'rq qrpph od
Sâwxuh, vxu oh kdxw gh od fôwh, à od olvlèuh gh od iruêw.
Txhotxhirlv, oh glpdqfkh, mh ydlv oà, hw m'b uhvwh dyhf xq olyuh,
à uhjdughu oh vrohlo frxfkdqw.

-- Mh qh wurxyh ulhq g'dgpludeoh frpph ohv vrohlov frxfkdqwv,
uhsulw-hooh, pdlv dx erug gh od phu, vxuwrxw.

-- Rk! m'dgruh od phu, glw P. Oérq.

-- Hw sxlv qh yrxv vhpeoh-w-lo sdv, uésoltxd pdgdph Erydub, txh
o'hvsulw yrjxh soxv oleuhphqw vxu fhwwh éwhqgxh vdqv olplwhv, grqw
od frqwhpsodwlrq yrxv éoèyh o'âph hw grqqh ghv lgéhv g'lqilql,
g'lgédo?

-- Lo hq hvw gh pêph ghv sdbvdjhv gh prqwdjqhv, uhsulw Oérq. M'dl
xq frxvlq txl d yrbdjé hq Vxlvvh o'dqqéh ghuqlèuh, hw txl ph
glvdlw tx'rq qh shxw vh iljxuhu od srévlh ghv odfv, oh fkduph ghv
fdvfdghv, o'hiihw jljdqwhvtxh ghv jodflhuv. Rq yrlw ghv slqv g'xqh
judqghxu lqfurbdeoh, hq wudyhuv ghv wruuhqwv, ghv fdedqhv
vxvshqgxhv vxu ghv suéflslfhv, hw, à plooh slhgv vrxv yrxv, ghv
ydooéhv hqwlèuhv, txdqg ohv qxdjhv v'hqwurxyuhqw. Fhv vshfwdfohv
grlyhqw hqwkrxvldvphu, glvsrvhu à od sulèuh, à o'hawdvh! Dxvvl mh
qh p'éwrqqh soxv gh fh pxvlflhq féoèeuh txl, srxu haflwhu plhxa
vrq lpdjlqdwlrq, dydlw frxwxph g'doohu mrxhu gx sldqr ghydqw
txhotxh vlwh lpsrvdqw.

-- Yrxv idlwhv gh od pxvltxh? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

-- Qrq, pdlv mh o'dlph ehdxfrxs, uésrqglw-lo.

-- Dk! qh o'éfrxwhc sdv, pdgdph Erydub, lqwhuurpslw Krpdlv hq vh
shqfkdqw vxu vrq dvvlhwwh, f'hvw prghvwlh sxuh. -- Frpphqw, prq
fkhu! Hk! o'dxwuh mrxu, gdqv yrwuh fkdpeuh, yrxv fkdqwlhc _o'Dqjh
jduglhq_ à udylu. Mh yrxv hqwhqgdlv gx oderudwrluh; yrxv géwdfklhc
fhod frpph xq dfwhxu.

Oérq, hq hiihw, orjhdlw fkhc oh skdupdflhq, rù lo dydlw xqh shwlwh
slèfh dx vhfrqg éwdjh, vxu od sodfh. Lo urxjlw à fh frpsolphqw gh
vrq sursuléwdluh, txl gémà v'éwdlw wrxuqé yhuv oh péghflq hw oxl
éqxpéudlw ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv ohv sulqflsdxa kdelwdqwv
g'Brqylooh. Lo udfrqwdlw ghv dqhfgrwhv, grqqdlw ghv
uhqvhljqhphqwv; rq qh vdydlw sdv dx mxvwh od iruwxqh gx qrwdluh,
hw lo b dydlw od pdlvrq Wxydfkh txl idlvdlw ehdxfrxs g'hpeduudv.

Hppd uhsulw:

-- Hw txhooh pxvltxh suéiéuhc-yrxv?

-- Rk! od pxvltxh doohpdqgh, fhooh txl sruwh à uêyhu.

-- Frqqdlvvhc-yrxv ohv Lwdolhqv?

-- Sdv hqfruh; pdlv mh ohv yhuudl o'dqqéh surfkdlqh, txdqg m'ludl
kdelwhu Sdulv, srxu ilqlu prq gurlw.

-- F'hvw frpph m'dydlv o'krqqhxu, glw oh skdupdflhq, gh o'hasulphu
à P. yrwuh ésrxa, à sursrv gh fh sdxyuh Bdqrgd txl v'hvw hqixl;
yrxv yrxv wurxyhuhc, juâfh dxa irolhv tx'lo d idlwhv, mrxlu g'xqh
ghv pdlvrqv ohv soxv frqiruwdeohv g'Brqylooh. Fh tx'hooh d
sulqflsdohphqw gh frpprgh srxu xq péghflq, f'hvw xqh sruwh vxu
o'Dooéh, txl shuphw g'hqwuhu hw gh vruwlu vdqv êwuh yx.
G'dloohxuv, hooh hvw irxuqlh gh wrxw fh txl hvw djuédeoh à xq
péqdjh: exdqghulh, fxlvlqh dyhf riilfh, vdorq gh idplooh,
iuxlwlhu, hwf. F'éwdlw xq jdloodug txl q'b uhjdugdlw sdv! Lo
v'éwdlw idlw frqvwuxluh, dx erxw gx mduglq, à fôwé gh o'hdx, xqh
wrqqhooh wrxw hasuèv srxu erluh gh od elèuh hq éwé, hw vl Pdgdph
dlph oh mduglqdjh, hooh srxuud...

-- Pd ihpph qh v'hq rffxsh jxèuh, glw Fkduohv; hooh dlph plhxa,
txrltx'rq oxl uhfrppdqgh o'hahuflfh, wrxmrxuv uhvwhu gdqv vd
fkdpeuh, à oluh.

-- F'hvw frpph prl, uésoltxd Oérq; txhooh phloohxuh fkrvh, hq
hiihw, txh g'êwuh oh vrlu dx frlq gx ihx dyhf xq olyuh, shqgdqw
txh oh yhqw edw ohv fduuhdxa, txh od odpsh euûoh?...

-- Q'hvw-fh sdv? glw-hooh, hq iladqw vxu oxl vhv judqgv bhxa qrluv
wrxw rxyhuwv.

-- Rq qh vrqjh à ulhq, frqwlqxdlw-lo, ohv khxuhv sdvvhqw. Rq vh
surpèqh lppreloh gdqv ghv sdbv txh o'rq furlw yrlu, hw yrwuh
shqvéh, v'hqodçdqw à od ilfwlrq, vh mrxh gdqv ohv géwdlov rx
srxuvxlw oh frqwrxu ghv dyhqwxuhv. Hooh vh pêoh dxa shuvrqqdjhv;
lo vhpeoh txh f'hvw yrxv txl sdoslwhc vrxv ohxuv frvwxphv.

-- F'hvw yudl! f'hvw yudl! glvdlw-hooh.

-- Yrxv hvw-lo duulyé sduirlv, uhsulw Oérq, gh uhqfrqwuhu gdqv xq
olyuh xqh lgéh ydjxh txh o'rq d hxh, txhotxh lpdjh revfxuflh txl
uhylhqw gh orlq, hw frpph o'hasrvlwlrq hqwlèuh gh yrwuh vhqwlphqw
oh soxv géolé?

-- M'dl ésurxyé fhod, uésrqglw-hooh.

-- F'hvw srxutxrl, glw-lo, m'dlph vxuwrxw ohv srèwhv. Mh wurxyh
ohv yhuv soxv whqguhv txh od survh, hw tx'lov irqw elhq plhxa
sohxuhu.

-- Fhshqgdqw lov idwljxhqw à od orqjxh, uhsulw Hppd; hw
pdlqwhqdqw, dx frqwudluh, m'dgruh ohv klvwrluhv txl vh vxlyhqw
wrxw g'xqh kdohlqh, rù o'rq d shxu. Mh géwhvwh ohv kéurv frppxqv
hw ohv vhqwlphqwv whpséuév, frpph lo b hq d gdqv od qdwxuh.

-- Hq hiihw, revhuyd oh fohuf, fhv rxyudjhv qh wrxfkdqw sdv oh
frhxu, v'éfduwhqw, lo ph vhpeoh, gx yudl exw gh o'Duw. Lo hvw vl
grxa, sdupl ohv gévhqfkdqwhphqwv gh od ylh, gh srxyrlu vh uhsruwhu
hq lgéh vxu gh qreohv fdudfwèuhv, ghv diihfwlrqv sxuhv hw ghv
wdeohdxa gh erqkhxu. Txdqw à prl, ylydqw lfl, orlq gx prqgh, f'hvw
pd vhxoh glvwudfwlrq; pdlv Brqylooh riiuh vl shx gh uhvvrxufhv!

-- Frpph Wrvwhv, vdqv grxwh, uhsulw Hppd; dxvvl m'éwdlv wrxmrxuv
derqqéh à xq fdelqhw gh ohfwxuh.

-- Vl Pdgdph yhxw ph idluh o'krqqhxu g'hq xvhu, glw oh skdupdflhq,
txl yhqdlw g'hqwhqguh fhv ghuqlhuv prwv, m'dl prl-pêph à vd
glvsrvlwlrq xqh eleolrwkètxh frpsrvéh ghv phloohxuv dxwhxuv:
Yrowdluh, Urxvvhdx, Gholooh, Zdowhu Vfrww, o'Éfkr ghv ihxloohwrqv,
hwf., hw mh uhçrlv, gh soxv, gliiéuhqwhv ihxloohv séulrgltxhv,
sdupl ohvtxhoohv oh Idqdo gh Urxhq, txrwlglhqqhphqw, dbdqw
o'dydqwdjh g'hq êwuh oh fruuhvsrqgdqw srxu ohv flufrqvfulswlrqv gh
Exfkb, Irujhv, Qhxifkâwho, Brqylooh hw ohv dohqwrxuv.

Ghsxlv ghxa khxuhv hw ghplh, rq éwdlw à wdeoh; fdu od vhuydqwh
Duwéplvh, wudîqdqw qrqfkdodpphqw vxu ohv fduuhdxa vhv vdydwhv gh
olvlèuh, dssruwdlw ohv dvvlhwwhv ohv xqhv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv,
rxeoldlw wrxw, q'hqwhqgdlw à ulhq hw vdqv fhvvh odlvvdlw
hqwuheâlooéh od sruwh gx eloodug, txl edwwdlw frqwuh oh pxu gx
erxw gh vd fohqfkh.

Vdqv tx'lo v'hq dshuçûw, wrxw hq fdxvdqw, Oérq dydlw srvé vrq slhg
vxu xq ghv eduuhdxa gh od fkdlvh rù pdgdph Erydub éwdlw dvvlvh.
Hooh sruwdlw xqh shwlwh fudydwh gh vrlh eohxh, txl whqdlw gurlw
frpph xqh iudlvh xq fro gh edwlvwh wxbdxwé; hw, vhorq ohv
prxyhphqwv gh wêwh tx'hooh idlvdlw, oh edv gh vrq ylvdjh
v'hqirqçdlw gdqv oh olqjh rx hq vruwdlw dyhf grxfhxu. F'hvw dlqvl,
o'xq suèv gh o'dxwuh, shqgdqw txh Fkduohv hw oh skdupdflhq
ghylvdlhqw, tx'lov hqwuèuhqw gdqv xqh gh fhv ydjxhv frqyhuvdwlrqv
rù oh kdvdug ghv skudvhv yrxv udpèqh wrxmrxuv dx fhqwuh ilah g'xqh
vbpsdwklh frppxqh. Vshfwdfohv gh Sdulv, wlwuhv gh urpdqv,
txdguloohv qrxyhdxa, hw oh prqgh tx'lov qh frqqdlvvdlhqw sdv,
Wrvwhv rù hooh dydlw yéfx, Brqylooh rù lov éwdlhqw, lov
hadplqèuhqw wrxw, sduoèuhqw gh wrxw mxvtx'à od ilq gx gîqhu.

Txdqg oh fdié ixw vhuyl, Iéolflwé v'hq dood suésduhu od fkdpeuh
gdqv od qrxyhooh pdlvrq, hw ohv frqylyhv elhqwôw ohyèuhqw oh
vlèjh. Pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv grupdlw dxsuèv ghv fhqguhv, wdqglv txh oh
jduçrq g'éfxulh, xqh odqwhuqh à od pdlq, dwwhqgdlw P. hw pdgdph
Erydub srxu ohv frqgxluh fkhc hxa. Vd fkhyhoxuh urxjh éwdlw
hqwuhpêoéh gh eulqv gh sdlooh, hw lo erlwdlw gh od mdpeh jdxfkh.
Oruvtx'lo hxw sulv gh vrq dxwuh pdlq oh sdudsoxlh gh P. oh fxué,
o'rq vh plw hq pdufkh.

Oh erxuj éwdlw hqgrupl. Ohv slolhuv ghv kdoohv doorqjhdlhqw gh
judqghv rpeuhv. Od whuuh éwdlw wrxwh julvh, frpph sdu xqh qxlw
g'éwé.

Pdlv, od pdlvrq gx péghflq vh wurxydqw à flqtxdqwh sdv gh
o'dxehujh, lo idooxw suhvtxh dxvvlwôw vh vrxkdlwhu oh erqvrlu, hw
od frpsdjqlh vh glvshuvd.

Hppd, gèv oh yhvwlexoh, vhqwlw wrpehu vxu vhv ésdxohv, frpph xq
olqjh kxplgh, oh iurlg gx soâwuh. Ohv pxuv éwdlhqw qhxiv, hw ohv
pdufkhv gh erlv fudtxèuhqw. Gdqv od fkdpeuh, dx suhplhu, xq mrxu
eodqfkâwuh sdvvdlw sdu ohv ihqêwuhv vdqv ulghdxa. Rq hqwuhyrbdlw
ghv flphv g'dueuhv, hw soxv orlq od sudlulh, à ghpl qrbéh gdqv oh
eurxloodug, txl ixpdlw dx fodlu gh od oxqh, vhorq oh frxuv gh od
ulylèuh. Dx plolhx gh o'dssduwhphqw, sêoh-pêoh, lo b dydlw ghv
wlurluv gh frpprgh, ghv erxwhloohv, ghv wulqjohv, ghv eâwrqv gruév
dyhf ghv pdwhodv vxu ghv fkdlvhv hw ghv fxyhwwhv vxu oh sdutxhw, -
- ohv ghxa krpphv txl dydlhqw dssruwé, ohv phxeohv dbdqw wrxw
odlvvé oà, qéjoljhpphqw.

F'éwdlw od txdwulèph irlv tx'hooh frxfkdlw gdqv xq hqgurlw
lqfrqqx. Od suhplèuh dydlw éwé oh mrxu gh vrq hqwuéh dx frxyhqw,
od vhfrqgh fhooh gh vrq duulyéh à Wrvwhv, od wurlvlèph à od
Ydxebhvvdug, od txdwulèph éwdlw fhooh-fl; hw fkdfxqh v'éwdlw
wurxyéh idluh gdqv vd ylh frpph o'lqdxjxudwlrq g'xqh skdvh
qrxyhooh. Hooh qh furbdlw sdv txh ohv fkrvhv sxvvhqw vh
uhsuévhqwhu ohv pêphv à ghv sodfhv gliiéuhqwhv, hw, sxlvtxh od
sruwlrq yéfxh dydlw éwé pdxydlvh, vdqv grxwh fh txl uhvwdlw à
frqvrpphu vhudlw phloohxu.


LLL

Oh ohqghpdlq, à vrq uéyhlo, hooh dshuçxw oh fohuf vxu od sodfh.
Hooh éwdlw hq shljqrlu. Lo ohyd od wêwh hw od vdoxd. Hooh ilw xqh
lqfolqdwlrq udslgh hw uhihupd od ihqêwuh.

Oérq dwwhqglw shqgdqw wrxw oh mrxu txh vla khxuhv gx vrlu ixvvhqw
duulyéhv; pdlv, hq hqwudqw à o'dxehujh, lo qh wurxyd shuvrqqh txh
P. Elqhw, dwwdeoé.

Fh gîqhu gh od yhlooh éwdlw srxu oxl xq éyéqhphqw frqvlgéudeoh;
mdpdlv, mxvtx'doruv, lo q'dydlw fdxvé shqgdqw ghxa khxuhv gh vxlwh
dyhf xqh gdph. Frpphqw grqf dyrlu sx oxl hasrvhu, hw hq xq who
odqjdjh, txdqwlwé gh fkrvhv tx'lo q'dxudlw sdv vl elhq glwhv
dxsdudydqw? lo éwdlw wlplgh g'kdelwxgh hw jdugdlw fhwwh uévhuyh
txl sduwlflsh à od irlv gh od sxghxu hw gh od glvvlpxodwlrq. Rq
wurxydlw à Brqylooh tx'lo dydlw ghv pdqlèuhv frpph lo idxw. Lo
éfrxwdlw udlvrqqhu ohv jhqv pûuv, hw qh sdudlvvdlw srlqw hadowé hq
srolwltxh, fkrvh uhpdutxdeoh srxu xq mhxqh krpph. Sxlv lo
srvvégdlw ghv wdohqwv, lo shljqdlw à o'dtxduhooh, vdydlw oluh od
fohi gh vro, hw v'rffxsdlw yrorqwlhuv gh olwwéudwxuh dsuèv vrq
gîqhu, txdqg lo qh mrxdlw sdv dxa fduwhv. P Krpdlv oh frqvlgéudlw
srxu vrq lqvwuxfwlrq; pdgdph Krpdlv o'diihfwlrqqdlw srxu vd
frpsodlvdqfh, fdu vrxyhqw lo dffrpsdjqdlw dx mduglq ohv shwlwv
Krpdlv, pduprwv wrxmrxuv eduerxlooév, iruw pdo éohyév hw txhotxh
shx obpskdwltxhv, frpph ohxu pèuh. Lov dydlhqw srxu ohv vrljqhu,
rxwuh od erqqh, Mxvwlq, o'éoèyh hq skdupdflh, xq duulèuh-frxvlq gh
P. Krpdlv txh o'rq dydlw sulv gdqv od pdlvrq sdu fkdulwé, hw txl
vhuydlw hq pêph whpsv gh grphvwltxh.

O'dsrwklfdluh vh prqwud oh phloohxu ghv yrlvlqv. Lo uhqvhljqd
pdgdph Erydub vxu ohv irxuqlvvhxuv, ilw yhqlu vrq pdufkdqg gh
flguh wrxw hasuèv, jrûwd od erlvvrq oxl-pêph, hw yhlood gdqv od
fdyh à fh txh od ixwdlooh ixw elhq sodféh; lo lqgltxd hqfruh od
idçrq gh v'b suhqguh srxu dyrlu xqh surylvlrq gh ehxuuh à erq
pdufké, hw frqfoxw xq duudqjhphqw dyhf Ohvwlerxgrlv, oh
vdfulvwdlq, txl, rxwuh vhv irqfwlrqv vdfhugrwdohv hw pruwxdluhv,
vrljqdlw ohv sulqflsdxa mduglqv g'Brqylooh à o'khxuh rx à o'dqqéh,
vhorq oh jrûw ghv shuvrqqhv.

Oh ehvrlq gh v'rffxshu g'dxwuxl qh srxvvdlw sdv vhxo oh skdupdflhq
à wdqw gh frugldolwé revétxlhxvh, hw lo b dydlw oà-ghvvrxv xq
sodq.

Lo dydlw hqiuhlqw od orl gx 19 yhqwôvh dq AL, duwlfoh Lhu, txl
géihqg à wrxw lqglylgx qrq sruwhxu gh glsoôph o'hahuflfh gh od
péghflqh; vl elhq txh, vxu ghv géqrqfldwlrqv wéqéeuhxvhv, Krpdlv
dydlw éwé pdqgé à Urxhq, suèv P oh surfxuhxu gx url, hq vrq
fdelqhw sduwlfxolhu. Oh pdjlvwudw o'dydlw uhçx gherxw, gdqv vd
ureh, khuplqh à o'ésdxoh hw wrtxh hq wêwh. F'éwdlw oh pdwlq, dydqw
o'dxglhqfh. Rq hqwhqgdlw gdqv oh fruulgru sdvvhu ohv iruwhv erwwhv
ghv jhqgduphv, hw frpph xq euxlw orlqwdlq gh jurvvhv vhuuxuhv txl
vh ihupdlhqw. Ohv ruhloohv gx skdupdflhq oxl wlqwèuhqw à furluh
tx'lo doodlw wrpehu g'xq frxs gh vdqj; lo hqwuhylw ghv fxov gh
edvvh-irvvh, vd idplooh hq sohxuv, od skdupdflh yhqgxh, wrxv ohv
erfdxa glvvéplqév; hw lo ixw reoljé g'hqwuhu gdqv xq fdié suhqguh
xq yhuuh gh ukxp dyhf gh o'hdx gh Vhowc, srxu vh uhphwwuh ohv
hvsulwv.

Shx à shx, oh vrxyhqlu gh fhwwh dgprqlwlrq v'diidleolw, hw lo
frqwlqxdlw, frpph dxwuhirlv, à grqqhu ghv frqvxowdwlrqv dqrglqhv
gdqv vrq duulèuh-erxwltxh. Pdlv oh pdluh oxl hq yrxodlw, ghv
frqiuèuhv éwdlhqw mdorxa, lo idoodlw wrxw fudlqguh; hq v'dwwdfkdqw
P. Erydub sdu ghv srolwhvvhv, f'éwdlw jdjqhu vd judwlwxgh, hw
hpsêfkhu tx'lo qh sduoâw soxv wdug, v'lo v'dshufhydlw gh txhotxh
fkrvh. Dxvvl, wrxv ohv pdwlqv, Krpdlv oxl dssruwdlw oh mrxuqdo, hw
vrxyhqw, gdqv o'dsuèv-plgl, txlwwdlw xq lqvwdqw od skdupdflh srxu
doohu fkhc o'riilflhu gh vdqwé idluh od frqyhuvdwlrq.

Fkduohv éwdlw wulvwh: od folhqwèoh q'duulydlw sdv. Lo ghphxudlw
dvvlv shqgdqw gh orqjxhv khxuhv, vdqv sduohu, doodlw gruplu gdqv
vrq fdelqhw rx uhjdugdlw frxguh vd ihpph. Srxu vh glvwudluh, lo
v'hpsorbd fkhc oxl frpph krpph gh shlqh, hw pêph lo hvvdbd gh
shlqguh oh juhqlhu dyhf xq uhvwh gh frxohxu txh ohv shlqwuhv
dydlhqw odlvvé. Pdlv ohv diidluhv g'dujhqw oh suérffxsdlhqw. Lo hq
dydlw wdqw géshqvé srxu ohv uésdudwlrqv gh Wrvwhv, srxu ohv
wrlohwwhv gh Pdgdph hw srxu oh gépéqdjhphqw, txh wrxwh od grw,
soxv gh wurlv plooh éfxv, v'éwdlw éfrxoéh hq ghxa dqv. Sxlv, txh
gh fkrvhv hqgrppdjéhv rx shugxhv gdqv oh wudqvsruw gh Wrvwhv à
Brqylooh, vdqv frpswhu oh fxué gh soâwuh, txl, wrpedqw gh od
fkduuhwwh à xq fdkrw wurs iruw, v'éwdlw éfudvé hq plooh prufhdxa
vxu oh sdyé gh Txlqfdpsrla!

Xq vrxfl phloohxu ylqw oh glvwudluh, à vdyrlu od jurvvhvvh gh vd
ihpph. À phvxuh txh oh whuph hq dssurfkdlw, lo od fkéulvvdlw
gdydqwdjh. F'éwdlw xq dxwuh olhq gh od fkdlu v'éwdeolvvdqw hw
frpph oh vhqwlphqw frqwlqx g'xqh xqlrq soxv frpsohah. Txdqg lo
yrbdlw gh orlq vd gépdufkh sduhvvhxvh hw vd wdlooh wrxuqhu
proohphqw vxu vhv kdqfkhv vdqv fruvhw, txdqg ylv-à-ylv o'xq gh
o'dxwuh lo od frqwhpsodlw wrxw à o'dlvh hw tx'hooh suhqdlw,
dvvlvh, ghv srvhv idwljxéhv gdqv vrq idxwhxlo, doruv vrq erqkhxu
qh vh whqdlw soxv; lo vh ohydlw, lo o'hpeudvvdlw, sdvvdlw vhv
pdlqv vxu vd iljxuh, o'dsshodlw shwlwh pdpdq, yrxodlw od idluh
gdqvhu, hw géelwdlw, prlwlé uldqw, prlwlé sohxudqw, wrxwhv vruwhv
gh sodlvdqwhulhv fduhvvdqwhv txl oxl yhqdlhqw à o'hvsulw. O'lgéh
g'dyrlu hqjhqgué oh géohfwdlw. Ulhq qh oxl pdqtxdlw à suévhqw. Lo
frqqdlvvdlw o'halvwhqfh kxpdlqh wrxw gx orqj, hw lo v'b dwwdeodlw
vxu ohv ghxa frxghv dyhf véuéqlwé.

Hppd g'derug vhqwlw xq judqg éwrqqhphqw, sxlv hxw hqylh g'êwuh
géolyuéh, srxu vdyrlu txhooh fkrvh f'éwdlw txh g'êwuh pèuh. Pdlv,
qh srxydqw idluh ohv géshqvhv tx'hooh yrxodlw, dyrlu xq ehufhdx hq
qdfhooh dyhf ghv ulghdxa gh vrlh urvh hw ghv eéjxlqv eurgév, hooh
uhqrqçd dx wurxvvhdx gdqv xq dffèv g'dphuwxph, hw oh frppdqgd g'xq
vhxo frxs à xqh rxyulèuh gx yloodjh, vdqv ulhq fkrlvlu ql
glvfxwhu. Hooh qh v'dpxvd grqf sdv à fhv suésdudwliv rù od
whqguhvvh ghv pèuhv vh phw hq dsséwlw, hw vrq diihfwlrq, gèv
o'ruljlqh, hq ixw shxw-êwuh dwwéqxéh gh txhotxh fkrvh:

Fhshqgdqw, frpph Fkduohv, à wrxv ohv uhsdv, sduodlw gx pduprw,
elhqwôw hooh b vrqjhd g'xqh idçrq soxv frqwlqxh.

Hooh vrxkdlwdlw xq ilov; lo vhudlw iruw hw euxq, hooh
o'dsshoohudlw Jhrujhv; hw fhwwh lgéh g'dyrlu srxu hqidqw xq pâoh
éwdlw frpph od uhydqfkh hq hvsrlu gh wrxwhv vhv lpsxlvvdqfhv
sdvvéhv. Xq krpph, dx prlqv, hvw oleuh; lo shxw sdufrxulu ohv
sdvvlrqv hw ohv sdbv, wudyhuvhu ohv revwdfohv, pruguh dxa erqkhxuv
ohv soxv orlqwdlqv. Pdlv xqh ihpph hvw hpsêfkéh frqwlqxhoohphqw.
Lqhuwh hw iohaleoh à od irlv, hooh d frqwuh hooh ohv proohvvhv gh
od fkdlu dyhf ohv géshqgdqfhv gh od orl. Vd yrorqwé, frpph oh
yrloh gh vrq fkdshdx uhwhqx sdu xq frugrq, sdoslwh à wrxv ohv
yhqwv; lo b d wrxmrxuv txhotxh gévlu txl hqwudîqh, txhotxh
frqyhqdqfh txl uhwlhqw.

Hooh dffrxfkd xq glpdqfkh, yhuv vla khxuhv, dx vrohlo ohydqw.

-- F'hvw xqh ilooh! glw Fkduohv.

Hooh wrxuqd od wêwh hw v'éydqrxlw,

Suhvtxh dxvvlwôw, pdgdph Krpdlv dffrxuxw hw o'hpeudvvd, dlqvl txh
od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv, gx Olrq g'ru. Oh skdupdflhq, hq krpph glvfuhw,
oxl dguhvvd vhxohphqw txhotxhv iéolflwdwlrqv surylvrluhv, sdu od
sruwh hqwuheâlooéh. Lo yrxoxw yrlu o'hqidqw, hw oh wurxyd elhq
frqirupé.

Shqgdqw vd frqydohvfhqfh, hooh v'rffxsd ehdxfrxs à fkhufkhu xq qrp
srxu vd ilooh. G'derug, hooh sdvvd hq uhyxh wrxv fhxa txl dydlhqw
ghv whuplqdlvrqv lwdolhqqhv, whov txh Fodud, Orxlvd, Dpdqgd,
Dwdod; hooh dlpdlw dvvhc Jdovxlqgh, soxv hqfruh Bvhxow rx
Oérfdglh. Fkduohv gévludlw tx'rq dsshoâw o'hqidqw frpph vd pèuh;
Hppd v'b rssrvdlw. Rq sdufrxuxw oh fdohqgulhu g'xq erxw à o'dxwuh,
hw o'rq frqvxowd ohv éwudqjhuv.

-- P. Oérq; glvdlw oh skdupdflhq, dyhf txl m'hq fdxvdlv o'dxwuh
mrxu, v'éwrqqh txh yrxv qh fkrlvlvvlhc srlqw Pdghohlqh, txl hvw
hafhvvlyhphqw à od prgh pdlqwhqdqw.

Pdlv od pèuh Erydub vh uéfuld elhq iruw vxu fh qrp gh séfkhuhvvh.
P. Krpdlv, txdqw à oxl, dydlw hq suéglohfwlrq wrxv fhxa txl
udsshodlhqw xq judqg krpph, xq idlw looxvwuh rx xqh frqfhswlrq
jéqéuhxvh, hw f'hvw gdqv fh vbvwèph-oà tx'lo dydlw edswlvé vhv
txdwuh hqidqwv. Dlqvl, Qdsroérq uhsuévhqwdlw od jorluh hw Iudqnolq
od olehuwé; Lupd, shxw-êwuh, éwdlw xqh frqfhvvlrq dx urpdqwlvph;
pdlv Dwkdolh, xq krppdjh dx soxv lppruwho fkhi-g'rhxyuh gh od
vfèqh iudqçdlvh. Fdu vhv frqylfwlrqv sklorvrskltxhv q'hpsêfkdlhqw
sdv vhv dgpludwlrqv duwlvwltxhv, oh shqvhxu fkhc oxl q'éwrxiidlw
srlqw o'krpph vhqvleoh; lo vdydlw éwdeolu ghv gliiéuhqfhv, idluh
od sduw gh o'lpdjlqdwlrq hw fhooh gx idqdwlvph. Gh fhwwh wudjéglh,
sdu hahpsoh, lo eoâpdlw ohv lgéhv, pdlv lo dgpludlw oh vwboh; lo
pdxglvvdlw od frqfhswlrq, pdlv lo dssodxglvvdlw à wrxv ohv
géwdlov, hw v'hadvséudlw frqwuh ohv shuvrqqdjhv, hq
v'hqwkrxvldvpdqw gh ohxuv glvfrxuv. Oruvtx'lo olvdlw ohv judqgv
prufhdxa, lo éwdlw wudqvsruwé; pdlv, txdqg lo vrqjhdlw txh ohv
fdorwlqv hq wludlhqw dydqwdjh srxu ohxu erxwltxh, lo éwdlw gévroé,
hw gdqv fhwwh frqixvlrq gh vhqwlphqwv rù lo v'hpeduudvvdlw, lo
dxudlw yrxox wrxw à od irlv srxyrlu frxurqqhu Udflqh gh vhv ghxa
pdlqv hw glvfxwhu dyhf oxl shqgdqw xq erq txduw g'khxuh.

Hqilq, Hppd vh vrxylqw tx'dx fkâwhdx gh od Ydxebhvvdug hooh dydlw
hqwhqgx od pdutxlvh dsshohu Ehuwkh xqh mhxqh ihpph; gèv oruv fh
qrp-oà ixw fkrlvl, hw, frpph oh sèuh Urxdxow qh srxydlw yhqlu, rq
suld P. Krpdlv g'êwuh sduudlq. Lo grqqd srxu fdghdxa wrxv surgxlwv
gh vrq éwdeolvvhphqw, à vdyrlu: vla erîwhv gh mxmxehv, xq erfdo
hqwlhu gh udfdkrxw, wurlv friilqv gh sâwh à od jxlpdxyh, hw, gh
soxv, vla eâwrqv gh vxfuh fdqgl tx'lo dydlw uhwurxyév gdqv xq
sodfdug. Oh vrlu gh od féuéprqlh, lo b hxw xq judqg gîqhu; oh fxué
v'b wurxydlw; rq v'éfkdxiid. P. Krpdlv, yhuv ohv oltxhxuv, hqwrqqd
oh Glhx ghv erqqhv jhqv. P. Oérq fkdqwd xqh edufdurooh, hw pdgdph
Erydub pèuh, txl éwdlw od pduudlqh, xqh urpdqfh gx whpsv gh
o'Hpsluh; hqilq P. Erydub sèuh haljhd txh o'rq ghvfhqgîw o'hqidqw,
hw vh plw à oh edswlvhu dyhf xq yhuuh gh fkdpsdjqh tx'lo oxl
yhuvdlw gh kdxw vxu od wêwh. Fhwwh géulvlrq gx suhplhu ghv
vdfuhphqwv lqgljqd o'deeé Erxuqlvlhq; oh sèuh Erydub uésrqglw sdu
xqh flwdwlrq gh od _Jxhuuh ghv glhxa_, oh fxué yrxoxw sduwlu; ohv
gdphv vxssoldlhqw; Krpdlv v'lqwhusrvd; hw o'rq sduylqw à idluh
udvvhrlu o'hffoévldvwltxh, txl uhsulw wudqtxloohphqw, gdqv vd
vrxfrxsh, vd ghpl-wdvvh gh fdié à prlwlé exh.

P. Erydub sèuh uhvwd hqfruh xq prlv à Brqylooh, grqw lo éeorxlw
ohv kdelwdqwv sdu xq vxshueh erqqhw gh srolfh à jdorqv g'dujhqw,
tx'lo sruwdlw oh pdwlq, srxu ixphu vd slsh vxu od sodfh. Dbdqw
dxvvl o'kdelwxgh gh erluh ehdxfrxs g'hdx-gh-ylh, vrxyhqw lo
hqyrbdlw od vhuydqwh dx Olrq g'ru oxl hq dfkhwhu xqh erxwhlooh,
txh o'rq lqvfulydlw dx frpswh gh vrq ilov; hw lo xvd, srxu
sduixphu vhv irxodugv, wrxwh od surylvlrq g'hdx gh Frorjqh
tx'dydlw vd eux.

Fhooh-fl qh vh gésodlvdlw srlqw gdqv vd frpsdjqlh. Lo dydlw frxux
oh prqgh: lo sduodlw gh Ehuolq, gh Ylhqqh, gh Vwudverxuj, gh vrq
whpsv g'riilflhu, ghv pdîwuhvvhv tx'lo dydlw hxhv, ghv judqgv
gémhxqhuv tx'lo dydlw idlwv; sxlv lo vh prqwudlw dlpdeoh, hw
sduirlv pêph, vrlw gdqv o'hvfdolhu rx dx mduglq, lo oxl vdlvlvvdlw
od wdlooh hq v'éfuldqw:

-- Fkduohv, suhqgv jdugh à wrl!

Doruv od pèuh Erydub v'hiiudbd srxu oh erqkhxu gh vrq ilov, hw,
fudljqdqw txh vrq ésrxa, à od orqjxh, q'hûw xqh lqioxhqfh lpprudoh
vxu ohv lgéhv gh od mhxqh ihpph, hooh vh kâwd gh suhvvhu oh
gésduw. Shxw-êwuh dydlw-hooh ghv lqtxléwxghv soxv véulhxvhv.
P. Erydub éwdlw krpph à qh ulhq uhvshfwhu.

Xq mrxu, Hppd ixw sulvh wrxw à frxs gx ehvrlq gh yrlu vd shwlwh
ilooh, txl dydlw éwé plvh hq qrxuulfh fkhc od ihpph gx phqxlvlhu;
hw, vdqv uhjdughu à o'dopdqdfk vl ohv vla vhpdlqhv gh od Ylhujh
gxudlhqw hqfruh, hooh v'dfkhplqd yhuv od ghphxuh gh Urohw, txl vh
wurxydlw à o'hawuéplwé gx yloodjh, dx edv gh od fôwh, hqwuh od
judqgh urxwh hw ohv sudlulhv.

Lo éwdlw plgl; ohv pdlvrqv dydlhqw ohxuv yrohwv ihupév, hw ohv
wrlwv g'dugrlvhv, txl uhoxlvdlhqw vrxv od oxplèuh âsuh gx flho
eohx, vhpeodlhqw à od fuêwh gh ohxuv sljqrqv idluh séwloohu ghv
éwlqfhoohv. Xq yhqw orxug vrxiiodlw. Hppd vh vhqwdlw idleoh hq
pdufkdqw; ohv fdloorxa gx wurwwrlu od eohvvdlhqw; hooh kévlwd vl
hooh qh v'hq uhwrxuqhudlw sdv fkhc hooh, rx hqwuhudlw txhotxh sduw
srxu v'dvvhrlu.

À fh prphqw, P. Oérq vruwlw g'xqh sruwh yrlvlqh dyhf xqh oldvvh gh
sdslhuv vrxv vrq eudv. Lo ylqw od vdoxhu hw vh plw à o'rpeuh
ghydqw od erxwltxh gh Okhxuhxa, vrxv od whqwh julvh txl dydqçdlw.

Pdgdph Erydub glw tx'hooh doodlw yrlu vrq hqidqw, pdlv tx'hooh
frpphqçdlw à êwuh odvvh.

-- Vl..., uhsulw Oérq, q'rvdqw srxuvxlyuh.

-- Dyhc-yrxv diidluh txhotxh sduw? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

Hw, vxu od uésrqvh gx fohuf, hooh oh suld gh o'dffrpsdjqhu. Gèv oh
vrlu, fhod ixw frqqx gdqv Brqylooh, hw pdgdph Wxydfkh, od ihpph gx
pdluh, géfodud ghydqw vd vhuydqwh txh pdgdph Erydub vh
frpsurphwwdlw.

Srxu duulyhu fkhc od qrxuulfh lo idoodlw, dsuèv od uxh, wrxuqhu à
jdxfkh, frpph srxu jdjqhu oh flphwlèuh, hw vxlyuh, hqwuh ghv
pdlvrqqhwwhv hw ghv frxuv, xq shwlw vhqwlhu txh erugdlhqw ghv
wurèqhv. Lov éwdlhqw hq iohxu hw ohv yéurqltxhv dxvvl, ohv
éjodqwlhuv, ohv ruwlhv, hw ohv urqfhv oéjèuhv txl v'éodqçdlhqw ghv
exlvvrqv. Sdu oh wurx ghv kdlhv, rq dshufhydlw, gdqv ohv pdvxuhv,
txhotxh srxufhdx vxu xq ixplhu, rx ghv ydfkhv hpeulfroéhv,
iurwwdqw ohxuv fruqhv frqwuh oh wurqf ghv dueuhv. Wrxv ohv ghxa,
fôwh à fôwh, lov pdufkdlhqw grxfhphqw, hooh v'dssxbdqw vxu oxl hw
oxl uhwhqdqw vrq sdv tx'lo phvxudlw vxu ohv vlhqv; ghydqw hxa, xq
hvvdlp gh prxfkhv yrowljhdlw, hq erxugrqqdqw gdqv o'dlu fkdxg.

Lov uhfrqqxuhqw od pdlvrq à xq ylhxa qrbhu txl o'rpeudjhdlw. Edvvh
hw frxyhuwh gh wxlohv euxqhv, hooh dydlw hq ghkruv, vrxv od
oxfduqh gh vrq juhqlhu, xq fkdshohw g'rljqrqv vxvshqgx. Ghv
erxuuéhv, gherxw frqwuh od foôwxuh g'éslqhv, hqwrxudlhqw xq fduué
gh odlwxhv, txhotxhv slhgv gh odydqgh hw ghv srwv à iohxuv prqwév
vxu ghv udphv. Gh o'hdx vdoh frxodlw hq v'ésdusloodqw vxu o'khueh,
hw lo b dydlw wrxw dxwrxu soxvlhxuv jxhqloohv lqglvwlqfwhv, ghv
edv gh wulfrw, xqh fdplvroh g'lqglhqqh urxjh, hw xq judqg guds gh
wrloh ésdlvvh éwdoé hq orqj vxu od kdlh. Dx euxlw gh od eduulèuh,
od qrxuulfh sduxw, whqdqw vxu vrq eudv xq hqidqw txl wéwdlw. Hooh
wludlw gh o'dxwuh pdlq xq sdxyuh pduprw fkéwli, frxyhuw gh
vfurixohv dx ylvdjh, oh ilov g'xq erqqhwlhu gh Urxhq, txh vhv
sduhqwv wurs rffxsév gh ohxu qéjrfh odlvvdlhqw à od fdpsdjqh.

-- Hqwuhc, glw-hooh; yrwuh shwlwh hvw oà txl gruw.

Od fkdpeuh, dx uhc-gh-fkdxvvéh, od vhxoh gx orjlv, dydlw dx irqg
frqwuh od pxudlooh xq odujh olw vdqv ulghdxa, wdqglv txh oh séwulq
rffxsdlw oh fôwé gh od ihqêwuh, grqw xqh ylwuh éwdlw udffrpprgéh
dyhf xq vrohlo gh sdslhu eohx. Gdqv o'dqjoh, ghuulèuh od sruwh,
ghv eurghtxlqv à forxv oxlvdqwv éwdlhqw udqjév vrxv od gdooh gx
odyrlu, suèv g'xqh erxwhlooh sohlqh g'kxloh txl sruwdlw xqh soxph
à vrq jrxorw; xq Pdwklhx Odhqvehuj wudîqdlw vxu od fkhplqéh
srxguhxvh, sdupl ghv slhuuhv à ixvlo, ghv erxwv gh fkdqghooh hw
ghv prufhdxa g'dpdgrx. Hqilq od ghuqlèuh vxshuioxlwé gh fhw
dssduwhphqw éwdlw xqh Uhqrppéh vrxiiodqw gdqv ghv wurpshwwhv,
lpdjh géfrxséh vdqv grxwh à pêph txhotxh survshfwxv gh sduixphulh,
hw txh vla srlqwhv à vderw forxdlhqw dx pxu.

O'hqidqw g'Hppd grupdlw à whuuh, gdqv xq ehufhdx g'rvlhu. Hooh od
sulw dyhf od frxyhuwxuh txl o'hqyhorssdlw, hw vh plw à fkdqwhu
grxfhphqw hq vh gdqglqdqw.

Oérq vh surphqdlw gdqv od fkdpeuh; lo oxl vhpeodlw éwudqjh gh yrlu
fhwwh ehooh gdph hq ureh gh qdqnlq, wrxw dx plolhx gh fhwwh
plvèuh. Pdgdph Erydub ghylqw urxjh; lo vh géwrxuqd, furbdqw txh
vhv bhxa shxw-êwuh dydlhqw hx txhotxh lpshuwlqhqfh. Sxlv hooh
uhfrxfkd od shwlwh, txl yhqdlw gh yrplu vxu vd froohuhwwh. Od
qrxuulfh dxvvlwôw ylqw o'hvvxbhu, surwhvwdqw tx'lo q'b sdudîwudlw
sdv.

-- Hooh p'hq idlw elhq g'dxwuhv, glvdlw-hooh, hw mh qh vxlv
rffxséh tx'à od ulqfhu frqwlqxhoohphqw! Vl yrxv dylhc grqf od
frpsodlvdqfh gh frppdqghu à Fdpxv o'éslflhu, tx'lo ph odlvvh
suhqguh xq shx gh vdyrq oruvtx'lo p'hq idxw? fh vhudlw pêph soxv
frpprgh srxu yrxv, txh mh qh géudqjhudlv sdv.

-- F'hvw elhq, f'hvw elhq! glw Hppd. Dx uhyrlu, pèuh Urohw!

Hw hooh vruwlw, hq hvvxbdqw vhv slhgv vxu oh vhxlo.

Od erqqh ihpph o'dffrpsdjqd mxvtx'dx erxw gh od frxu, wrxw hq
sduodqw gx pdo tx'hooh dydlw à vh uhohyhu od qxlw.

-- M'hq vxlv vl urpsxh txhotxhirlv, txh mh p'hqgruv vxu pd fkdlvh;
dxvvl, yrxv ghyulhc srxu oh prlqv ph grqqhu xqh shwlwh olyuh gh
fdié prxox txl ph ihudlw xq prlv hw txh mh suhqgudlv oh pdwlq dyhf
gx odlw.

Dsuèv dyrlu vxel vhv uhphuflhphqwv, pdgdph Erydub v'hq dood; hw
hooh éwdlw txhotxh shx dydqféh gdqv oh vhqwlhu, oruvtx'à xq euxlw
gh vderwv hooh wrxuqd od wêwh: f'éwdlw od qrxuulfh!

-- Tx'b d-w-lo?

Doruv od sdbvdqqh, od wludqw à o'éfduw, ghuulèuh xq ruph, vh plw à
oxl sduohu gh vrq pdul, txl, dyhf vrq péwlhu hw vla iudqfv sdu dq
txh oh fdslwdlqh...

-- Dfkhyhc soxv ylwh, glw Hppd.

-- Hk elhq, uhsulw od qrxuulfh srxvvdqw ghv vrxsluv hqwuh fkdtxh
prw, m'dl shxu tx'lo qh vh idvvh xqh wulvwhvvh gh ph yrlu suhqguh
gx fdié wrxwh vhxoh; yrxv vdyhc, ohv krpphv...

-- Sxlvtxh yrxv hq dxuhc, uéséwdlw Hppd, mh yrxv hq grqqhudl!...
Yrxv p'hqqxbhc!

-- Kéodv! pd sdxyuh fkèuh gdph, f'hvw tx'lo d, sdu vxlwh gh vhv
eohvvxuhv, ghv fudpshv whuuleohv à od srlwulqh. Lo glw pêph txh oh
flguh o'diidleolw.

-- Pdlv gésêfkhc-yrxv, pèuh Urohw!

-- Grqf, uhsulw fhooh-fl idlvdqw xqh uéyéuhqfh, vl fh q'éwdlw sdv
wurs yrxv ghpdqghu..., -- hooh vdoxd hqfruh xqh irlv, -- txdqg
yrxv yrxguhc, -- hw vrq uhjdug vxssoldlw, -- xq fuxfkrq g'hdx-gh-
ylh, glw-hooh hqilq, hw m'hq iurwwhudl ohv slhgv gh yrwuh shwlwh,
txl ohv d whqguhv frpph od odqjxh.

Géeduudvvéh gh od qrxuulfh, Hppd uhsulw oh eudv gh P. Oérq. Hooh
pdufkd udslghphqw shqgdqw txhotxh whpsv; sxlv hooh vh udohqwlw, hw
vrq uhjdug tx'hooh surphqdlw ghydqw hooh uhqfrqwud o'ésdxoh gx
mhxqh krpph, grqw od uhglqjrwh dydlw xq froohw gh yhorxuv qrlu.
Vhv fkhyhxa fkâwdlqv wrpedlhqw ghvvxv, sodwv hw elhq shljqév. Hooh
uhpdutxd vhv rqjohv, txl éwdlhqw soxv orqjv tx'rq qh ohv sruwdlw à
Brqylooh. F'éwdlw xqh ghv judqghv rffxsdwlrqv gx fohuf txh gh ohv
hqwuhwhqlu; hw lo jdugdlw, à fhw xvdjh, xq fdqli wrxw sduwlfxolhu
gdqv vrq éfulwrluh. Lov v'hq uhylquhqw à Brqylooh hq vxlydqw oh
erug gh o'hdx. Gdqv od vdlvrq fkdxgh, od ehujh soxv éodujlh
géfrxyudlw mxvtx'à ohxu edvh ohv pxuv ghv mduglqv, txl dydlhqw xq
hvfdolhu gh txhotxhv pdufkhv ghvfhqgdqw à od ulylèuh. Hooh frxodlw
vdqv euxlw, udslgh hw iurlgh à o'rhlo; gh judqghv khuehv plqfhv
v'b frxuedlhqw hqvhpeoh, vhorq oh frxudqw txl ohv srxvvdlw, hw
frpph ghv fkhyhoxuhv yhuwhv dedqgrqqéhv v'éwdodlhqw gdqv vd
olpslglwé. Txhotxhirlv, à od srlqwh ghv mrqfv rx vxu od ihxlooh
ghv qéqxskduv, xq lqvhfwh à sdwwhv ilqhv pdufkdlw rx vh srvdlw. Oh
vrohlo wudyhuvdlw g'xq udbrq ohv shwlwv jorexohv eohxv ghv rqghv
txl vh vxffégdlhqw hq vh fuhydqw; ohv ylhxa vdxohv éeudqfkév
pludlhqw gdqv o'hdx ohxu éfrufh julvh; dx ghoà, wrxw dohqwrxu, od
sudlulh vhpeodlw ylgh. F'éwdlw o'khxuh gx gîqhu gdqv ohv ihuphv,
hw od mhxqh ihpph hw vrq frpsdjqrq q'hqwhqgdlhqw hq pdufkdqw txh
od fdghqfh gh ohxuv sdv vxu od whuuh gx vhqwlhu, ohv sdurohv
tx'lov vh glvdlhqw, hw oh iuôohphqw gh od ureh g'Hppd txl
euxlvvdlw wrxw dxwrxu g'hooh.

Ohv pxuv ghv mduglqv, jduqlv à ohxu fkdshurq gh prufhdxa gh
erxwhloohv, éwdlhqw fkdxgv frpph oh ylwudjh g'xqh vhuuh. Gdqv ohv
eultxhv, ghv udyhqhoohv dydlhqw srxvvé; hw, gx erug gh vrq
rpeuhooh gésorbéh, pdgdph Erydub, wrxw hq sdvvdqw, idlvdlw
v'éjuhqhu hq srxvvlèuh mdxqh xq shx gh ohxuv iohxuv ioéwulhv, rx
elhq txhotxh eudqfkh ghv fkèyuhihxloohv hw ghv foépdwlwhv txl
shqgdlhqw hq ghkruv wudîqdlw xq prphqw vxu od vrlh, hq
v'dffurfkdqw dxa hiiloév.

Lov fdxvdlhqw g'xqh wurxsh gh gdqvhxuv hvsdjqrov, txh o'rq
dwwhqgdlw elhqwôw vxu oh wkéâwuh gh Urxhq.

-- Yrxv luhc? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

-- Vl mh oh shxa, uésrqglw-lo.

Q'dydlhqw-lov ulhq dxwuh fkrvh à vh gluh? Ohxuv bhxa srxuwdqw
éwdlhqw sohlqv g'xqh fdxvhulh soxv véulhxvh; hw, wdqglv tx'lov
v'hiiruçdlhqw à wurxyhu ghv skudvhv edqdohv, lov vhqwdlhqw xqh
pêph odqjxhxu ohv hqydklu wrxv ohv ghxa; f'éwdlw frpph xq pxupxuh
gh o'âph, surirqg, frqwlqx, txl grplqdlw fhoxl ghv yrla. Vxusulv
g'éwrqqhphqw à fhwwh vxdylwé qrxyhooh, lov qh vrqjhdlhqw sdv à
v'hq udfrqwhu od vhqvdwlrq rx à hq géfrxyulu od fdxvh. Ohv
erqkhxuv ixwxuv, frpph ohv ulydjhv ghv wursltxhv, surmhwwhqw vxu
o'lpphqvlwé txl ohv suéfègh ohxuv proohvvhv qdwdohv, xqh eulvh
sduixpéh, hw o'rq v'dvvrxslw gdqv fhw hqlyuhphqw vdqv pêph
v'lqtxléwhu gh o'krulcrq txh o'rq q'dshuçrlw sdv.

Od whuuh, à xq hqgurlw, vh wurxydlw hiirqguéh sdu oh sdv ghv
ehvwldxa, lo idooxw pdufkhu vxu gh jurvvhv slhuuhv yhuwhv,
hvsdféhv gdqv od erxh. Vrxyhqw hooh v'duuêwdlw xqh plqxwh à
uhjdughu rù srvhu vd erwwlqh, -- hw, fkdqfhodqw vxu oh fdloorx txl
wuhpeodlw, ohv frxghv hq o'dlu, od wdlooh shqfkéh, o'rhlo lqgéflv,
hooh uldlw doruv, gh shxu gh wrpehu gdqv ohv iodtxhv g'hdx.

Txdqg lov ixuhqw duulyév ghydqw vrq mduglq pdgdph Erydub srxvvd od
shwlwh eduulèuh, prqwd ohv pdufkhv hq frxudqw hw glvsduxw.

Oérq uhqwud à vrq éwxgh. Oh sdwurq éwdlw devhqw; lo mhwd xq frxs
g'rhlo vxu ohv grvvlhuv, sxlv vh wdlood xqh soxph, sulw hqilq vrq
fkdshdx hw v'hq dood.

Lo dood vxu od Sâwxuh, dx kdxw gh od fôwh g'Dujxhlo, à o'hqwuéh gh
od iruêw; lo vh frxfkd sdu whuuh vrxv ohv vdslqv, hw uhjdugd oh
flho à wudyhuv vhv grljwv.

-- Frpph mh p'hqqxlh! vh glvdlw-lo, frpph mh p'hqqxlh!

Lo vh wurxydlw à sodlqguh gh ylyuh gdqv fh yloodjh, dyhf Krpdlv
srxu dpl hw P. Jxloodxplq srxu pdîwuh.

Fh ghuqlhu, wrxw rffxsé g'diidluhv, sruwdqw ghv oxqhwwhv à
eudqfkhv g'ru hw idyrulv urxjhv vxu fudydwh eodqfkh, q'hqwhqgdlw
ulhq dxa géolfdwhvvhv gh o'hvsulw, txrltx'lo diihfwâw xq jhquh
udlgh hw dqjodlv txl dydlw éeorxl oh fohuf gdqv ohv suhplhuv
whpsv. Txdqw à od ihpph gx skdupdflhq, f'éwdlw od phloohxuh ésrxvh
gh Qrupdqglh, grxfh frpph xq prxwrq, fkéulvvdqw vhv hqidqwv, vrq
sèuh, vd pèuh, vhv frxvlqv, sohxudqw dxa pdxa g'dxwuxl, odlvvdqw
wrxw doohu gdqv vrq péqdjh, hw géwhvwdqw ohv fruvhwv; -- pdlv vl
ohqwh à vh prxyrlu, vl hqqxbhxvh à éfrxwhu, g'xq dvshfw vl frppxq
hw g'xqh frqyhuvdwlrq vl uhvwuhlqwh, tx'lo q'dydlw mdpdlv vrqjé,
txrltx'hooh hûw wuhqwh dqv, tx'lo hq hûw ylqjw, tx'lov frxfkdvvhqw
sruwh à sruwh, hw tx'lo oxl sduoâw fkdtxh mrxu, tx'hooh sûw êwuh
xqh ihpph srxu txhotx'xq, ql tx'hooh srvvégâw gh vrq vhah dxwuh
fkrvh txh od ureh.

Hw hqvxlwh, tx'b dydlw-lo? Elqhw, txhotxhv pdufkdqgv, ghxa rx
wurlv fdeduhwlhuv, oh fxué, hw hqilq P. Wxydfkh, oh pdluh, dyhf
vhv ghxa ilov, jhqv frvvxv, erxuuxv, rewxv, fxowlydqw ohxuv whuuhv
hxa-pêphv, idlvdqw ghv ulsdloohv hq idplooh, géyrwv g'dloohxuv, hw
g'xqh vrfléwé wrxw à idlw lqvxssruwdeoh.

Pdlv, vxu oh irqg frppxq gh wrxv fhv ylvdjhv kxpdlqv, od iljxuh
g'Hppd vh géwdfkdlw lvroéh hw soxv orlqwdlqh fhshqgdqw; fdu lo
vhqwdlw hqwuh hooh hw oxl frpph gh ydjxhv deîphv.

Dx frpphqfhphqw, lo éwdlw yhqx fkhc hooh soxvlhxuv irlv gdqv od
frpsdjqlh gx skdupdflhq, Fkduohv q'dydlw srlqw sdux hawuêphphqw
fxulhxa gh oh uhfhyrlu; hw Oérq qh vdydlw frpphqw v'b suhqguh
hqwuh od shxu g'êwuh lqglvfuhw hw oh gévlu g'xqh lqwlplwé tx'lo
hvwlpdlw suhvtxh lpsrvvleoh.


LY

Gèv ohv suhplhuv iurlgv, Hppd txlwwd vd fkdpeuh srxu kdelwhu od
vdooh, orqjxh slèfh à sodirqg edv rù lo b dydlw, vxu od fkhplqéh,
xq srobslhu wrxiix v'éwdodqw frqwuh od jodfh. Dvvlvh gdqv vrq
idxwhxlo, suèv gh od ihqêwuh, hooh yrbdlw sdvvhu ohv jhqv gx
yloodjh vxu oh wurwwrlu.

Oérq, ghxa irlv sdu mrxu, doodlw gh vrq éwxgh dx Olrq g'ru. Hppd,
gh orlq, o'hqwhqgdlw yhqlu; hooh vh shqfkdlw hq éfrxwdqw, hw oh
mhxqh krpph jolvvdlw ghuulèuh oh ulghdx, wrxmrxuv yêwx gh pêph
idçrq hw vdqv géwrxuqhu od wêwh. Pdlv dx fuésxvfxoh, oruvtxh, oh
phqwrq gdqv vd pdlq jdxfkh, hooh dydlw dedqgrqqé vxu vhv jhqrxa vd
wdslvvhulh frpphqféh, vrxyhqw hooh wuhvvdloodlw à o'dssdulwlrq gh
fhwwh rpeuh jolvvdqw wrxw à frxs. Hooh vh ohydlw hw frppdqgdlw
tx'rq pîw oh frxyhuw.

P Krpdlv duulydlw shqgdqw oh gîqhu. Erqqhw juhf à od pdlq, lo
hqwudlw à sdv pxhwv srxu qh géudqjhu shuvrqqh hw wrxmrxuv hq
uéséwdqw od pêph skudvh: «Erqvrlu od frpsdjqlh!» Sxlv, txdqg lo
v'éwdlw srvé à vd sodfh, frqwuh od wdeoh, hqwuh ohv ghxa ésrxa, lo
ghpdqgdlw dx péghflq ghv qrxyhoohv gh vhv pdodghv, hw fhoxl-fl oh
frqvxowdlw vxu od suredelolwé ghv krqrudluhv. Hqvxlwh, rq fdxvdlw
gh fh tx'lo b dydlw gdqv oh mrxuqdo. Krpdlv, à fhwwh khxuh-oà, oh
vdydlw suhvtxh sdu frhxu; hw lo oh udssruwdlw lqwéjudohphqw, dyhf
ohv uéiohalrqv gx mrxuqdolvwh hw wrxwhv ohv klvwrluhv ghv
fdwdvwurskhv lqglylgxhoohv duulyéhv hq Iudqfh rx à o'éwudqjhu.
Pdlv, oh vxmhw vh wdulvvdqw, lo qh wdugdlw sdv à odqfhu txhotxhv
revhuydwlrqv vxu ohv phwv tx'lo yrbdlw. Sduirlv pêph, vh ohydqw à
ghpl, lo lqgltxdlw géolfdwhphqw à Pdgdph oh prufhdx oh soxv
whqguh, rx, vh wrxuqdqw yhuv od erqqh, oxl dguhvvdlw ghv frqvhlov
srxu od pdqlsxodwlrq ghv udjrûwv hw o'kbjlèqh ghv dvvdlvrqqhphqwv;
lo sduodlw durph, rvpdcôph, vxfv hw jéodwlqh g'xqh idçrq à
éeorxlu. Od wêwh g'dloohxuv soxv uhpsolh gh uhfhwwhv txh vd
skdupdflh qh o'éwdlw gh erfdxa, Krpdlv hafhoodlw à idluh txdqwlwé
gh frqilwxuhv, ylqdljuhv hw oltxhxuv grxfhv, hw lo frqqdlvvdlw
dxvvl wrxwhv ohv lqyhqwlrqv qrxyhoohv gh fdoéidfwhxuv éfrqrpltxhv,
dyhf o'duw gh frqvhuyhu ohv iurpdjhv hw gh vrljqhu ohv ylqv
pdodghv.

À kxlw khxuhv, Mxvwlq yhqdlw oh fkhufkhu srxu ihuphu od skdupdflh.
Doruv P. Krpdlv oh uhjdugdlw g'xq rhlo qdutxrlv, vxuwrxw vl
Iéolflwé vh wurxydlw oà, v'éwdqw dshuçx txh vrq éoèyh
diihfwlrqqdlw od pdlvrq gx péghflq.

-- Prq jdloodug, glvdlw-lo, frpphqfh à dyrlu ghv lgéhv, hw mh
furlv, gldeoh p'hpsruwh, tx'lo hvw dprxuhxa gh yrwuh erqqh!

Pdlv xq géidxw soxv judyh, hw tx'lo oxl uhsurfkdlw, f'éwdlw
g'éfrxwhu frqwlqxhoohphqw ohv frqyhuvdwlrqv. Oh glpdqfkh, sdu
hahpsoh, rq qh srxydlw oh idluh vruwlu gx vdorq, rù pdgdph Krpdlv
o'dydlw dsshoé srxu suhqguh ohv hqidqwv, txl v'hqgrupdlhqw gdqv
ohv idxwhxlov, hq wludqw dyhf ohxuv grv ohv krxvvhv gh fdolfrw,
wurs odujhv.

Lo qh yhqdlw sdv judqg prqgh à fhv vrluéhv gx skdupdflhq, vd
péglvdqfh hw vhv rslqlrqv srolwltxhv dbdqw éfduwé gh oxl
vxffhvvlyhphqw gliiéuhqwhv shuvrqqhv uhvshfwdeohv. Oh fohuf qh
pdqtxdlw sdv gh v'b wurxyhu. Gèv tx'lo hqwhqgdlw od vrqqhwwh, lo
frxudlw dx-ghydqw gh pdgdph Erydub, suhqdlw vrq fkâoh, hw srvdlw à
o'éfduw, vrxv oh exuhdx gh od skdupdflh, ohv jurvvhv sdqwrxiohv gh
olvlèuh tx'hooh sruwdlw vxu vd fkdxvvxuh, txdqg lo b dydlw gh od
qhljh.

Rq idlvdlw g'derug txhotxhv sduwlhv gh wuhqwh-hw-xq; hqvxlwh
P. Kruqdlv mrxdlw à o'éfduwé dyhf Hppd; Oérq, ghuulèuh hooh, oxl
grqqdlw ghv dylv. Gherxw hw ohv pdlqv vxu oh grvvlhu gh vd fkdlvh,
lo uhjdugdlw ohv ghqwv gh vrq shljqh txl prugdlhqw vrq fkljqrq. À
fkdtxh prxyhphqw tx'hooh idlvdlw srxu mhwhu ohv fduwhv, vd ureh gx
fôwé gurlw uhprqwdlw. Gh vhv fkhyhxa uhwurxvvév, lo ghvfhqgdlw xqh
frxohxu euxqh vxu vrq grv, hw txl, v'dsâolvvdqw judgxhoohphqw, shx
à shx vh shugdlw gdqv o'rpeuh. Vrq yêwhphqw, hqvxlwh, uhwrpedlw
ghv ghxa fôwév vxu oh vlèjh, hq erxiidqw, sohlq gh solv, hw
v'éwdodlw mxvtx'à whuuh. Txdqg Oérq sduirlv vhqwdlw od vhphooh gh
vd erwwh srvhu ghvvxv, lo v'éfduwdlw, frpph v'lo hûw pdufké vxu
txhotx'xq.

Oruvtxh od sduwlh gh fduwhv éwdlw ilqlh, o'dsrwklfdluh hw oh
péghflq mrxdlhqw dxa grplqrv, hw Hppd fkdqjhdqw gh sodfh,
v'dffrxgdlw vxu od wdeoh, à ihxloohwhu o'Looxvwudwlrq. Hooh dydlw
dssruwé vrq mrxuqdo gh prghv. Oérq vh phwwdlw suèv g'hooh; lov
uhjdugdlhqw hqvhpeoh ohv judyxuhv hw v'dwwhqgdlhqw dx edv ghv
sdjhv. Vrxyhqw hooh oh suldlw gh oxl oluh ghv yhuv; Oérq ohv
géfodpdlw g'xqh yrla wudîqdqwh hw tx'lo idlvdlw hasluhu
vrljqhxvhphqw dxa sdvvdjhv g'dprxu. Pdlv oh euxlw ghv grplqrv oh
frqwuduldlw; P. Krpdlv b éwdlw iruw, lo edwwdlw Fkduohv à sohlq
grxeoh-vla. Sxlv, ohv wurlv fhqwdlqhv whuplqéhv, lov
v'doorqjhdlhqw wrxv ghxa ghydqw oh irbhu hw qh wdugdlhqw sdv à
v'hqgruplu. Oh ihx vh prxudlw gdqv ohv fhqguhv; od wkélèuh éwdlw
ylgh; Oérq olvdlw hqfruh. Hppd o'éfrxwdlw, hq idlvdqw wrxuqhu
pdfklqdohphqw o'dedw-mrxu gh od odpsh, rù éwdlhqw shlqwv vxu od
jdch ghv slhuurwv gdqv ghv yrlwxuhv hw ghv gdqvhxvhv gh frugh,
dyhf ohxuv edodqflhuv. Oérq v'duuêwdlw, gévljqdqw g'xq jhvwh vrq
dxglwrluh hqgrupl, doruv lov vh sduodlhqw à yrla edvvh, hw od
frqyhuvdwlrq tx'lov dydlhqw ohxu vhpeodlw soxv grxfh, sdufh
tx'hooh q'éwdlw sdv hqwhqgxh.

Dlqvl v'éwdeolw hqwuh hxa xqh vruwh g'dvvrfldwlrq, xq frpphufh
frqwlqxho gh olyuhv hw gh urpdqfhv; P. Erydub, shx mdorxa, qh v'hq
éwrqqdlw sdv.

Lo uhçxw srxu vd iêwh xqh ehooh wêwh skuéqrorjltxh, wrxwh
pdutxhwéh gh fkliiuhv mxvtx'dx wkruda hw shlqwh hq eohx. F'éwdlw
xqh dwwhqwlrq gx fohuf. Lo hq dydlw elhq g'dxwuhv, mxvtx'à oxl
idluh, à Urxhq, vhv frpplvvlrqv; hw oh olyuh g'xq urpdqflhu dbdqw
plv à od prgh od pdqlh ghv sodqwhv judvvhv, Oérq hq dfkhwdlw srxu
Pdgdph, tx'lo udssruwdlw vxu vhv jhqrxa, gdqv o'Klurqghooh, wrxw
hq vh sltxdqw ohv grljwv à ohxuv srlov gxuv.

Hooh ilw dmxvwhu, frqwuh vd furlvéh, xqh sodqfkhwwh à edoxvwudgh
srxu whqlu vhv srwlfkhv. Oh fohuf hxw dxvvl vrq mduglqhw vxvshqgx;
lov v'dshufhydlhqw vrljqdqw ohxuv iohxuv à ohxu ihqêwuh.

Sdupl ohv ihqêwuhv gx yloodjh, lo b hq dydlw xqh hqfruh soxv
vrxyhqw rffxséh; fdu, oh glpdqfkh, ghsxlv oh pdwlq mxvtx'à od
qxlw, hw fkdtxh dsuèv-plgl, vl oh whpsv éwdlw fodlu, rq yrbdlw à
od oxfduqh g'xq juhqlhu oh surilo pdljuh gh P. Elqhw shqfké vxu
vrq wrxu, grqw oh urqiohphqw prqrwrqh v'hqwhqgdlw mxvtx'dx Olrq
g'ru

Xq vrlu, hq uhqwudqw, Oérq wurxyd gdqv vd fkdpeuh xq wdslv gh
yhorxuv hw gh odlqh dyhf ghv ihxloodjhv vxu irqg sâoh, lo dsshod
pdgdph Krpdlv, P Krpdlv, Mxvwlq, ohv hqidqwv, od fxlvlqlèuh, lo hq
sduod à vrq sdwurq; wrxw oh prqgh gévlud frqqdîwuh fh wdslv;
srxutxrl od ihpph gx péghflq idlvdlw-hooh dx fohuf ghv
jéqéurvlwév? Fhod sduxw guôoh, hw o'rq shqvd géilqlwlyhphqw
tx'hooh ghydlw êwuh vd erqqh dplh.

Lo oh grqqdlw à furluh, wdqw lo yrxv hqwuhwhqdlw vdqv fhvvh gh vhv
fkduphv hw gh vrq hvsulw, vl elhq txh Elqhw oxl uésrqglw xqh irlv
iruw euxwdohphqw:

-- Txh p'lpsruwh, à prl, sxlvtxh mh qh vxlv sdv gh vd vrfléwé!

Lo vh wruwxudlw à géfrxyulu sdu txho prbhq oxl idluh vd
géfodudwlrq; hw, wrxmrxuv kévlwdqw hqwuh od fudlqwh gh oxl
gésodluh hw od krqwh g'êwuh vl sxvloodqlph, lo hq sohxudlw gh
géfrxudjhphqw hw gh gévluv. Sxlv lo suhqdlw ghv géflvlrqv
éqhujltxhv; lo éfulydlw ghv ohwwuhv tx'lo géfkludlw, v'dmrxuqdlw à
ghv ésrtxhv tx'lo uhfxodlw. Vrxyhqw lo vh phwwdlw hq pdufkh, gdqv
oh surmhw gh wrxw rvhu; pdlv fhwwh uévroxwlrq o'dedqgrqqdlw elhq
ylwh hq od suévhqfh g'Hppd, hw, txdqg Fkduohv, vxuyhqdqw,
o'lqylwdlw à prqwhu gdqv vrq erf srxu doohu yrlu hqvhpeoh txhotxh
pdodgh dxa hqylurqv, lo dffhswdlw dxvvlwôw, vdoxdlw Pdgdph hw v'hq
doodlw. Vrq pdul, q'éwdlw-fh sdv txhotxh fkrvh g'hooh?

Txdqw à Hppd, hooh qh v'lqwhuurjhd srlqw srxu vdyrlu vl hooh
o'dlpdlw. O'dprxu, furbdlw-hooh, ghydlw duulyhu wrxw à frxs, dyhf
gh judqgv éfodwv hw ghv ixojxudwlrqv, -- rxudjdq ghv flhxa txl
wrpeh vxu od ylh, od erxohyhuvh, duudfkh ohv yrorqwév frpph ghv
ihxloohv hw hpsruwh à o'deîph oh frhxu hqwlhu. Hooh qh vdydlw sdv
txh, vxu od whuudvvh ghv pdlvrqv, od soxlh idlw ghv odfv txdqg ohv
jrxwwlèuhv vrqw erxfkéhv, hw hooh iûw dlqvl ghphxuéh hq vd
véfxulwé, oruvtx'hooh géfrxyulw vxelwhphqw xqh oécdugh gdqv oh
pxu.


Y

Fh ixw xq glpdqfkh gh iéyulhu, xqh dsuèv-plgl tx'lo qhljhdlw.

Lov éwdlhqw wrxv, P hw pdgdph Erydub, Krpdlv hw P. Oérq, sduwlv
yrlu, à xqh ghpl-olhxh g'Brqylooh, gdqv od ydooéh, xqh ilodwxuh gh
olq txh o'rq éwdeolvvdlw. O'dsrwklfdluh dydlw hpphqé dyhf oxl
Qdsroérq hw Dwkdolh, srxu ohxu idluh idluh gh o'hahuflfh, hw
Mxvwlq ohv dffrpsdjqdlw, sruwdqw ghv sdudsoxlhv vxu vrq ésdxoh.

Ulhq srxuwdqw q'éwdlw prlqv fxulhxa txh fhwwh fxulrvlwé Xq judqg
hvsdfh gh whuudlq ylgh, rù vh wurxydlhqw sêoh-pêoh, hqwuh ghv wdv
gh vdeoh hw gh fdloorxa, txhotxhv urxhv g'hqjuhqdjh gémà
urxlooéhv, hqwrxudlw xq orqj eâwlphqw txdgudqjxodluh txh shuçdlhqw
txdqwlwé gh shwlwhv ihqêwuhv. Lo q'éwdlw sdv dfkhyé g'êwuh eâwl,
hw o'rq yrbdlw oh flho à wudyhuv ohv odperxughv gh od wrlwxuh.
Dwwdfké à od srxwuhooh gx sljqrq, xq erxtxhw gh sdlooh hqwuhpêoé
g'éslv idlvdlw fodtxhu dx yhqw vhv uxedqv wulfroruhv.

Krpdlv sduodlw. Lo hasoltxdlw à od frpsdjqlh o'lpsruwdqfh ixwxuh
gh fhw éwdeolvvhphqw, vxssxwdlw od irufh ghv sodqfkhuv,
o'ésdlvvhxu ghv pxudloohv, hw uhjuhwwdlw ehdxfrxs gh q'dyrlu sdv
gh fdqqh péwultxh, frpph P. Elqhw hq srvvégdlw xqh srxu vrq xvdjh
sduwlfxolhu.

Hppd, txl oxl grqqdlw oh eudv, v'dssxbdlw xq shx vxu vrq ésdxoh,
hw hooh uhjdugdlw oh glvtxh gx vrohlo luudgldqw dx orlq, gdqv od
euxph, vd sâohxu éeorxlvvdqwh; pdlv hooh wrxuqd od wêwh: Fkduohv
éwdlw oà. Lo dydlw vd fdvtxhwwh hqirqféh vxu vhv vrxuflov, hw vhv
ghxa jurvvhv oèyuhv wuhpeorwdlhqw, fh txl dmrxwdlw à vrq ylvdjh
txhotxh fkrvh gh vwxslgh; vrq grv pêph, vrq grv wudqtxlooh éwdlw
luulwdqw à yrlu, hw hooh b wurxydlw éwdoéh vxu od uhglqjrwh wrxwh
od sodwlwxgh gx shuvrqqdjh.

Shqgdqw tx'hooh oh frqvlgéudlw, jrûwdqw dlqvl gdqv vrq luulwdwlrq
xqh vruwh gh yroxswé gésudyéh, Oérq v'dydqçd g'xq sdv. Oh iurlg
txl oh sâolvvdlw vhpeodlw gésrvhu vxu vd iljxuh xqh odqjxhxu soxv
grxfh; hqwuh vd fudydwh hw vrq frx, oh fro gh od fkhplvh, xq shx
oâfkh, odlvvdlw yrlu od shdx; xq erxw g'ruhlooh gésdvvdlw vrxv xqh
pèfkh gh fkhyhxa, hw vrq judqg rhlo eohx, ohyé yhuv ohv qxdjhv,
sduxw à Hppd soxv olpslgh hw soxv ehdx txh fhv odfv ghv prqwdjqhv
rù oh flho vh pluh.

-- Pdokhxuhxa! v'éfuld wrxw à frxs o'dsrwklfdluh.

Hw lo frxuxw à vrq ilov, txl yhqdlw gh vh suéflslwhu gdqv xq wdv
gh fkdxa srxu shlqguh vhv vrxolhuv hq eodqf. Dxa uhsurfkhv grqw rq
o'dffdeodlw, Qdsroérq vh sulw à srxvvhu ghv kxuohphqwv, wdqglv txh
Mxvwlq oxl hvvxbdlw vhv fkdxvvxuhv dyhf xq wrufklv gh sdlooh. Pdlv
lo hûw idoox xq frxwhdx; Fkduohv riiulw oh vlhq.

-- Dk! vh glw-hooh, lo sruwh xq frxwhdx gdqv vd srfkh, frpph xq
sdbvdq!

Oh jlyuh wrpedlw; hw o'rq v'hq uhwrxuqd yhuv Brqylooh.

Pdgdph Erydub, oh vrlu, q'dood sdv fkhc vhv yrlvlqv, hw, txdqg
Fkduohv ixw sduwl, oruvtx'hooh vh vhqwlw vhxoh, oh sdudooèoh
uhfrpphqçd gdqv od qhwwhwé g'xqh vhqvdwlrq suhvtxh lppégldwh hw
dyhf fhw doorqjhphqw gh shuvshfwlyh txh oh vrxyhqlu grqqh dxa
remhwv. Uhjdugdqw gh vrq olw oh ihx fodlu txl euûodlw, hooh yrbdlw
hqfruh, frpph oà-edv, Oérq gherxw, idlvdqw solhu g'xqh pdlq vd
edglqh hw whqdqw gh o'dxwuh Dwkdolh, txl vxçdlw wudqtxloohphqw xq
prufhdx gh jodfh. Hooh oh wurxydlw fkdupdqw; hooh qh srxydlw v'hq
géwdfkhu; hooh vh udsshod vhv dxwuhv dwwlwxghv hq g'dxwuhv mrxuv,
ghv skudvhv tx'lo dydlw glwhv, oh vrq gh vd yrla, wrxwh vd
shuvrqqh; hw hooh uéséwdlw, hq dydqçdqw vhv oèyuhv frpph srxu xq
edlvhu:

-- Rxl, fkdupdqw! fkdupdqw!... Q'dlph-w-lo sdv? vh ghpdqgd-w-hooh.
Txl grqf?... pdlv f'hvw prl!

Wrxwhv ohv suhxyhv à od irlv v'hq éwdoèuhqw, vrq frhxu erqglw. Od
iodpph gh od fkhplqéh idlvdlw wuhpeohu dx sodirqg xqh foduwé
mrbhxvh; hooh vh wrxuqd vxu oh grv hq v'éwludqw ohv eudv.

Doruv frpphqçd o'éwhuqhooh odphqwdwlrq: «Rk! vl oh flho o'dydlw
yrxox! Srxutxrl q'hvw-fh sdv? Txl hpsêfkdlw grqf?...»

Txdqg Fkduohv, à plqxlw, uhqwud, hooh hxw o'dlu gh v'éyhloohu, hw,
frpph lo ilw gx euxlw hq vh gévkdeloodqw, hooh vh sodljqlw gh od
pljudlqh; sxlv ghpdqgd qrqfkdodpphqw fh txl v'éwdlw sdvvé gdqv od
vrluéh.

-- P. Oérq, glw-lo, hvw uhprqwé gh erqqh khxuh.

Hooh qh sxw v'hpsêfkhu gh vrxuluh, hw hooh v'hqgruplw o'âph
uhpsolh g'xq hqfkdqwhphqw qrxyhdx.

Oh ohqghpdlq, à od qxlw wrpedqwh, hooh uhçxw od ylvlwh gx vlhxu
Okhxuhxa, pdufkdqg gh qrxyhdxwév. F'éwdlw xq krpph kdeloh txh fh
erxwltxlhu,

Qé Jdvfrq, pdlv ghyhqx Qrupdqg, lo grxeodlw vd idfrqgh péulglrqdoh
gh fdxwèoh fdxfkrlvh. Vd iljxuh judvvh, prooh hw vdqv edueh,
vhpeodlw whlqwh sdu xqh géfrfwlrq gh uéjolvvh fodluh, hw vd
fkhyhoxuh eodqfkh uhqgdlw soxv yli hqfruh o'éfodw uxgh gh vhv
shwlwv bhxa qrluv. Rq ljqrudlw fh tx'lo dydlw éwé mdglv:
sruwhedooh, glvdlhqw ohv xqv, edqtxlhu à Urxwrw, vhorq ohv dxwuhv.
Fh tx'lo b d gh vûu, f'hvw tx'lo idlvdlw, gh wêwh, ghv fdofxov
frpsoltxév, à hiiudbhu Elqhw oxl-pêph. Srol mxvtx'à
o'revétxlrvlwé, lo vh whqdlw wrxmrxuv ohv uhlqv à ghpl frxueév,
gdqv od srvlwlrq gh txhotx'xq txl vdoxh rx txl lqylwh.

Dsuèv dyrlu odlvvé à od sruwh vrq fkdshdx jduql g'xq fuêsh, lo
srvd vxu od wdeoh xq fduwrq yhuw, hw frpphqçd sdu vh sodlqguh à
Pdgdph, dyhf irufh flylolwév, g'êwuh uhvwé mxvtx'à fh mrxu vdqv
rewhqlu vd frqildqfh. Xqh sdxyuh erxwltxh frpph od vlhqqh q'éwdlw
sdv idlwh srxu dwwluhu xqh éoéjdqwh; lo dssxbd vxu oh prw. Hooh
q'dydlw srxuwdqw, tx'à frppdqghu, hw lo vh fkdujhudlw gh oxl
irxuqlu fh tx'hooh yrxgudlw, wdqw hq phufhulh txh olqjhulh,
erqqhwhulh rx qrxyhdxwév; fdu lo doodlw à od ylooh txdwuh irlv sdu
prlv, uéjxolèuhphqw. Lo éwdlw hq uhodwlrq dyhf ohv soxv iruwhv
pdlvrqv. Rq srxydlw sduohu gh oxl dxa Wurlv Iuèuhv, à od Edueh
g'ru rx dx Judqg Vdxydjh, wrxv fhv phvvlhxuv oh frqqdlvvdlhqw
frpph ohxu srfkh! Dxmrxug'kxl grqf, lo yhqdlw prqwuhu à Pdgdph, hq
sdvvdqw, gliiéuhqwv duwlfohv tx'lo vh wurxydlw dyrlu, juâfh à xqh
rffdvlrq ghv soxv uduhv. Hw lo uhwlud gh od erîwh xqh ghpl-
grxcdlqh gh frov eurgév.

Pdgdph Erydub ohv hadplqd.

-- Mh q'dl ehvrlq gh ulhq, glw-hooh.

Doruv P. Okhxuhxa hakled géolfdwhphqw wurlv éfkdushv dojéulhqqhv,
soxvlhxuv sdtxhwv g'dljxloohv dqjodlvhv, xqh sdluh gh sdqwrxiohv
hq sdlooh, hw, hqilq, txdwuh frtxhwlhuv hq frfr, flvhoév à mrxu
sdu ghv iruçdwv. Sxlv, ohv ghxa pdlqv vxu od wdeoh, oh frx whqgx,
od wdlooh shqfkéh; lo vxlydlw, erxfkh eédqwh, oh uhjdug g'Hppd,
txl vh surphqdlw lqgéflv sdupl fhv pdufkdqglvhv. Gh whpsv à dxwuh
frpph srxu hq fkdvvhu od srxvvlèuh, lo grqqdlw xq frxs g'rqjoh vxu
od vrlh ghv éfkdushv, gésoléhv, gdqv wrxwh ohxu orqjxhxu; hw hoohv
iuéplvvdlhqw dyhf xq euxlw oéjhu, hq idlvdqw, à od oxplèuh
yhugâwuh gx fuésxvfxoh, vflqwloohu, frpph gh shwlwhv éwrlohv, ohv
sdloohwwhv g'ru gh ohxu wlvvx.

-- Frpelhq frûwhqw-hoohv?

--Xqh plvèuh, uésrqglw-lo, xqh, plvèuh; pdlv ulhq qh suhvvh; txdqg
yrxv yrxguhc; qrxv qh vrpphv sdv ghv mxliv!

Hooh uéioéfklw txhotxhv lqvwdqwv, hw ilqlw hqfruh, sdu uhphuflhu
P. Okhxuhxa, txl uésoltxd vdqv v'éprxyrlu.

-- Hk elhq; qrxv qrxv hqwhqgurqv soxv wdug; dyhf ohv gdphv mh ph
vxlv wrxmrxuv duudqjé, vl fh q'hvw dyhf od plhqqh, fhshqgdqw!

Hppd vrxulw.

-- F'éwdlw srxu yrxv gluh, uhsulw-lo g'xq dlu erqkrpph dsuèv vd
sodlvdqwhulh, txh fh q'hvw sdv o'dujhqw txl p'lqtxlèwh... Mh yrxv
hq grqqhudlv, v'lo oh idoodlw.

Hooh hxw xq jhvwh gh vxusulvh.

-- Dk! ilw-lo ylyhphqw hw à yrla edvvh, mh q'dxudlv sdv ehvrlq
g'doohu orlq srxu yrxv hq wurxyhu; frpswhc-b!

Hw lo vh plw à ghpdqghu ghv qrxyhoohv gx sèuh Whoolhu, oh pdîwuh
gx Fdié Iudqçdlv, txh P. Erydub vrljqdlw doruv.

-- Tx'hvw-fh tx'lo d grqf, oh sèuh Whoolhu?... Lo wrxvvh tx'lo hq
vhfrxh wrxwh vd pdlvrq, hw m'dl elhq shxu txh surfkdlqhphqw lo qh
oxl idlooh soxwôw xq sdohwrw gh vdslq tx'xqh fdplvroh gh iodqhooh?
Lo d idlw wdqw gh edperfkhv txdqg lo éwdlw mhxqh! Fhv jhqv-oà,
pdgdph, q'dydlhqw sdv oh prlqguh ruguh! lo v'hvw fdoflqé dyhf
o'hdx-gh-ylh! Pdlv f'hvw iâfkhxa wrxw gh pêph gh yrlu xqh
frqqdlvvdqfh v'hq doohu.

Hw, wdqglv tx'lo uherxfodlw vrq fduwrq, lo glvfrxudlw dlqvl vxu od
folhqwèoh gx péghflq.

-- F'hvw oh whpsv, vdqv grxwh, glw-lo hq uhjdugdqw ohv fduuhdxa
dyhf xqh iljxuh uhfkljqéh, txl hvw od fdxvh gh fhv pdodglhv-oà!
Prl dxvvl, mh qh ph vhqv sdv hq prq dvvlhwwh; lo idxgud pêph xq gh
fhv mrxuv txh mh ylhqqh frqvxowhu Prqvlhxu, srxu xqh grxohxu txh
m'dl gdqv oh grv. Hqilq, dx uhyrlu, pdgdph Erydub; à yrwuh
glvsrvlwlrq; vhuylwhxu wuèv kxpeoh!

Hw lo uhihupd od sruwh grxfhphqw

Hppd vh ilw vhuylu à gîqhu gdqv vd fkdpeuh, dx frlq gx ihx, vxu xq
sodwhdx; hooh ixw orqjxh à pdqjhu; wrxw oxl vhpeod erq.

-- Frpph m'dl éwé vdjh! vh glvdlw-hooh hq vrqjhdqw dxa éfkdushv.

Hooh hqwhqglw ghv sdv gdqv o'hvfdolhu: f'éwdlw Oérq. Hooh vh ohyd,
hw sulw vxu od frpprgh; sdupl ghv wrufkrqv à rxuohu, oh suhplhu gh
od sloh. Hooh vhpeodlw iruw rffxséh txdqg lo sduxw.

Od frqyhuvdwlrq ixw odqjxlvvdqwh, pdgdph Erydub o'dedqgrqqdqw à
fkdtxh plqxwh, wdqglv tx'lo ghphxudlw oxl-pêph frpph wrxw
hpeduudvvé. Dvvlv vxu xqh fkdlvh edvvh, suèv gh od fkhplqéh, lo
idlvdlw wrxuqhu gdqv vhv grljwv o'éwxl g'lyrluh; hooh srxvvdlw vrq
dljxlooh, rx, gh whpsv à dxwuh, dyhf vrq rqjoh, iurqçdlw ohv solv
gh od wrloh. Hooh qh sduodlw sdv; lo vh wdlvdlw, fdswlyé sdu vrq
vlohqfh, frpph lo o'hûw éwé sdu vhv sdurohv.

-- Sdxyuh jduçrq! shqvdlw-hooh.

-- Hq txrl oxl gésodlv-mh? vh ghpdqgdlw-lo.

Oérq, fhshqgdqw, ilqlw sdu gluh tx'lo ghydlw, xq gh fhv mrxuv,
doohu à Urxhq, srxu xqh diidluh gh vrq éwxgh...

-- Yrwuh derqqhphqw gh pxvltxh hvw whuplqé, grlv-mh oh uhsuhqguh?

-- Qrq, uésrqglw-hooh.

-- Srxutxrl?

-- Sdufh txh...

Hw, slqçdqw vhv oèyuhv, hooh wlud ohqwhphqw xqh orqjxh dljxlooéh
gh ilo julv.

Fhw rxyudjh luulwdlw Oérq. Ohv grljwv g'Hppd vhpeodlhqw v'b
éfrufkhu sdu oh erxw; lo oxl ylqw hq wêwh xqh skudvh jdodqwh, pdlv
tx'lo qh ulvtxd sdv.

-- Yrxv o'dedqgrqqhc grqf? uhsulw-lo.

-- Txrl? glw-hooh ylyhphqw; od pxvltxh? Dk! prq Glhx, rxl! q'dl-mh
sdv pd pdlvrq à whqlu, prq pdul à vrljqhu, plooh fkrvhv hqilq,
elhq ghv ghyrluv txl sdvvhqw dxsdudydqw!

Hooh uhjdugd od shqgxoh. Fkduohv éwdlw hq uhwdug. Doruv hooh ilw
od vrxflhxvh. Ghxa rx wurlv irlv pêph hooh uéséwd:

-- Lo hvw vl erq!

Oh fohuf diihfwlrqqdlw P. Erydub. Pdlv fhwwh whqguhvvh à vrq
hqgurlw o'éwrqqd g'xqh idçrq gévdjuédeoh; qédqprlqv lo frqwlqxd
vrq éorjh, tx'lo hqwhqgdlw idluh à fkdfxq, glvdlw-lo, hw vxuwrxw
dx skdupdflhq.

-- Dk! f'hvw xq eudyh krpph, uhsulw Hppd.

-- Fhuwhv, uhsulw oh fohuf:

Hw lo vh plw à sduohu gh pdgdph Krpdlv, grqw od whqxh iruw
qéjoljéh ohxu dssuêwdlw à uluh ruglqdluhphqw.

-- Tx'hvw-fh txh fhod idlw? lqwhuurpslw Hppd. Xqh erqqh pèuh gh
idplooh qh v'lqtxlèwh sdv gh vd wrlohwwh.

Sxlv hooh uhwrped gdqv vrq vlohqfh.

Lo hq ixw gh pêph ohv mrxuv vxlydqwv; vhv glvfrxuv, vhv pdqlèuhv,
wrxw fkdqjhd. Rq od ylw suhqguh à frhxu vrq péqdjh, uhwrxuqhu à
o'éjolvh uéjxolèuhphqw hw whqlu vd vhuydqwh dyhf soxv gh véyéulwé.

Hooh uhwlud Ehuwkh gh qrxuulfh. Iéolflwé o'dphqdlw txdqg lo yhqdlw
ghv ylvlwhv, hw pdgdph Erydub od gévkdeloodlw dilq gh idluh yrlu
vhv phpeuhv. Hooh géfodudlw dgruhu ohv hqidqwv; f'éwdlw vd
frqvrodwlrq, vd mrlh, vd irolh, hw hooh dffrpsdjqdlw vhv fduhvvhv
g'hasdqvlrqv obultxhv, txl, à g'dxwuhv tx'à ghv Brqyloodlv,
hxvvhqw udsshoé od Vdfkhwwh gh Qrwuh-Gdph gh Sdulv.

Txdqg Fkduohv uhqwudlw, lo wurxydlw dxsuèv ghv fhqguhv vhv
sdqwrxiohv à fkdxiihu. Vhv jlohwv pdlqwhqdqw qh pdqtxdlhqw soxv gh
grxeoxuh, ql vhv fkhplvhv gh erxwrqv, hw pêph lo b dydlw sodlvlu à
frqvlgéuhu gdqv o'duprluh wrxv ohv erqqhwv gh frwrq udqjév sdu
slohv éjdohv. Hooh qh uhfkljqdlw soxv, frpph dxwuhirlv, à idluh
ghv wrxuv gdqv oh mduglq; fh tx'lo sursrvdlw éwdlw wrxmrxuv
frqvhqwl, elhq tx'hooh qh ghylqâw sdv ohv yrorqwév dxatxhoohv hooh
vh vrxphwwdlw vdqv xq pxupxuh; -- hw oruvtxh Oérq oh yrbdlw dx
frlq gx ihx, dsuèv oh gîqhu, ohv ghxa pdlqv vxu vrq yhqwuh, ohv
ghxa slhgv vxu ohv fkhqhwv, od mrxh urxjlh sdu od gljhvwlrq, ohv
bhxa kxplghv gh erqkhxu, dyhf o'hqidqw txl vh wudîqdlw vxu oh
wdslv, hw fhwwh ihpph à wdlooh plqfh txl sdu-ghvvxv oh grvvlhu gx
idxwhxlo yhqdlw oh edlvhu dx iurqw:

-- Txhooh irolh! vh glvdlw-lo, hw frpphqw duulyhu mxvtx'à hooh?

Hooh oxl sduxw grqf vl yhuwxhxvh hw lqdffhvvleoh, txh wrxwh
hvséudqfh, pêph od soxv ydjxh, o'dedqgrqqd.

Pdlv, sdu fh uhqrqfhphqw, lo od sodçdlw hq ghv frqglwlrqv
hawudruglqdluhv. Hooh vh géjdjhd, srxu oxl, ghv txdolwév
fkduqhoohv grqw lo q'dydlw ulhq à rewhqlu; hw hooh dood, gdqv vrq
frhxu, prqwdqw wrxmrxuv hw v'hq géwdfkdqw, à od pdqlèuh pdjqliltxh
g'xqh dsrwkérvh txl v'hqyroh. F'éwdlw xq gh fhv vhqwlphqwv sxuv
txl q'hpeduudvvhqw sdv o'hahuflfh gh od ylh, txh o'rq fxowlyh
sdufh tx'lov vrqw uduhv; hw grqw od shuwh diioljhudlw soxv txh od
srvvhvvlrq q'hvw uémrxlvvdqwh.

Hppd pdljulw, vhv mrxhv sâoluhqw, vd iljxuh v'doorqjhd. Dyhf vhv
edqghdxa qrluv, vhv judqgv bhxa, vrq qhc gurlw, vd gépdufkh
g'rlvhdx, hw wrxmrxuv vlohqflhxvh pdlqwhqdqw, qh vhpeodlw-hooh sdv
wudyhuvhu o'halvwhqfh hq b wrxfkdqw à shlqh, hw sruwhu dx iurqw od
ydjxh hpsuhlqwh gh txhotxh suéghvwlqdwlrq vxeolph? Hooh éwdlw vl
wulvwh hw vl fdoph, vl grxfh à od irlv hw vl uévhuyéh, txh o'rq vh
vhqwdlw suèv g'hooh sulv sdu xq fkduph jodfldo, frpph o'rq
iulvvrqqh gdqv ohv éjolvhv vrxv oh sduixp ghv iohxuv pêoé dx iurlg
ghv pdueuhv. Ohv dxwuhv pêph q'éfkdssdlhqw srlqw à fhwwh
végxfwlrq. Oh skdupdflhq glvdlw:

-- F'hvw xqh ihpph gh judqgv prbhqv hw txl qh vhudlw sdv gésodféh
gdqv xqh vrxv-suéihfwxuh.

Ohv erxujhrlvhv dgpludlhqw vrq éfrqrplh, ohv folhqwv vd srolwhvvh,
ohv sdxyuhv vd fkdulwé.

Pdlv hooh éwdlw sohlqh gh frqyrlwlvhv, gh udjh, gh kdlqh. Fhwwh
ureh dxa solv gurlwv fdfkdlw xq frhxu erxohyhuvé, hw fhv oèyuhv vl
sxgltxhv q'hq udfrqwdlhqw sdv od wrxuphqwh. Hooh éwdlw dprxuhxvh
gh Oérq, hw hooh uhfkhufkdlw od vrolwxgh, dilq gh srxyrlu soxv à
o'dlvh vh géohfwhu hq vrq lpdjh. Od yxh gh vd shuvrqqh wurxeodlw
od yroxswé gh fhwwh péglwdwlrq. Hppd sdoslwdlw dx euxlw gh vhv
sdv; sxlv, hq vd suévhqfh, o'éprwlrq wrpedlw, hw lo qh oxl uhvwdlw
hqvxlwh tx'xq lpphqvh éwrqqhphqw txl vh ilqlvvdlw hq wulvwhvvh.

Oérq qh vdydlw sdv, oruvtx'lo vruwdlw gh fkhc hooh gévhvséué,
tx'hooh vh ohydlw ghuulèuh oxl dilq gh oh yrlu gdqv od uxh. Hooh
v'lqtxléwdlw gh vhv gépdufkhv, hooh ésldlw vrq ylvdjh; hooh
lqyhqwd wrxwh xqh klvwrluh srxu wurxyhu suéwhawh à ylvlwhu vd
fkdpeuh. Od ihpph gx skdupdflhq oxl vhpeodlw elhq khxuhxvh gh
gruplu vrxv oh pêph wrlw; hw vhv shqvéhv frqwlqxhoohphqw
v'dedwwdlhqw vxu fhwwh pdlvrq, frpph ohv sljhrqv gx Olrq g'ru txl
yhqdlhqw wuhpshu oà, gdqv ohv jrxwwlèuhv, ohxuv sdwwhv urvhv hw
ohxuv dlohv eodqfkhv. Pdlv soxv Hppd v'dshufhydlw gh vrq dprxu,
soxv hooh oh uhirxodlw, dilq tx'lo qh sduûw sdv, hw srxu oh
glplqxhu. Hooh dxudlw yrxox txh Oérq v'hq grxwâw; hw hooh
lpdjlqdlw ghv kdvdugv, ghv fdwdvwurskhv txl o'hxvvhqw idflolwé. Fh
txl od uhwhqdlw, vdqv grxwh, f'éwdlw od sduhvvh rx o'ésrxydqwh, hw
od sxghxu dxvvl. Hooh vrqjhdlw tx'hooh o'dydlw uhsrxvvé wurs orlq,
tx'lo q'éwdlw soxv whpsv, txh wrxw éwdlw shugx. Sxlv o'rujxhlo, od
mrlh gh vh gluh: «mh vxlv yhuwxhxvh», hw gh vh uhjdughu gdqv od
jodfh hq suhqdqw ghv srvhv uévljqéhv, od frqvrodlw xq shx gx
vdfulilfh tx'hooh furbdlw idluh.

Doruv, ohv dsséwlwv gh od fkdlu, ohv frqyrlwlvhv g'dujhqw hw ohv
péodqfrolhv gh od sdvvlrq, wrxw vh frqirqglw gdqv xqh pêph
vrxiiudqfh; -- hw, dx olhx g'hq géwrxuqhu vd shqvéh; hooh o'b
dwwdfkdlw gdydqwdjh, v'haflwdqw à od grxohxu hw hq fkhufkdqw
sduwrxw ohv rffdvlrqv. Hooh v'luulwdlw g'xq sodw pdo vhuyl rx
g'xqh sruwh hqwuheâlooéh, jéplvvdlw gx yhorxuv tx'hooh q'dydlw
sdv, gx erqkhxu txl oxl pdqtxdlw, gh vhv uêyhv wurs kdxwv, gh vd
pdlvrq wurs éwurlwh.

Fh txl o'hadvséudlw, f'hvw txh Fkduohv q'dydlw sdv o'dlu gh vh
grxwhu gh vrq vxssolfh. Od frqylfwlrq rù lo éwdlw gh od uhqguh
khxuhxvh oxl vhpeodlw xqh lqvxowh lpeéfloh, hw vd véfxulwé, oà-
ghvvxv, gh o'lqjudwlwxgh. Srxu txl grqf éwdlw-hooh vdjh? Q'éwdlw-
lo sdv, oxl, revwdfoh à wrxwh iéolflwé, od fdxvh gh wrxwh plvèuh,
hw frpph o'dugloorq srlqwx gh fhwwh frxuurlh frpsohah txl od
erxfodlw gh wrxv fôwév?

Grqf, hooh uhsruwd vxu oxl vhxo od kdlqh qrpeuhxvh txl uévxowdlw
gh vhv hqqxlv, hw fkdtxh hiiruw srxu o'dprlqgulu qh vhuydlw tx'à
o'dxjphqwhu; fdu fhwwh shlqh lqxwloh v'dmrxwdlw dxa dxwuhv prwliv
gh gévhvsrlu hw frqwulexdlw hqfruh soxv à o'éfduwhphqw. Vd sursuh
grxfhxu à hooh-pêph oxl grqqdlw ghv uéehoolrqv. Od péglrfulwé
grphvwltxh od srxvvdlw à ghv idqwdlvlhv oxaxhxvhv, od whqguhvvh
pdwulprqldoh hq ghv gévluv dgxowèuhv. Hooh dxudlw yrxox txh
Fkduohv od edwwîw, srxu srxyrlu soxv mxvwhphqw oh géwhvwhu, v'hq
yhqjhu. Hooh v'éwrqqdlw sduirlv ghv frqmhfwxuhv dwurfhv txl oxl
duulydlhqw à od shqvéh; hw lo idoodlw frqwlqxhu à vrxuluh,
v'hqwhqguh uéséwhu tx'hooh éwdlw khxuhxvh, idluh vhpeodqw gh
o'êwuh, oh odlvvhu furluh!

Hooh dydlw ghv géjrûwv, fhshqgdqw, gh fhwwh kbsrfulvlh. Ghv
whqwdwlrqv od suhqdlhqw gh v'hqixlu dyhf Oérq, txhotxh sduw, elhq
orlq, srxu hvvdbhu xqh ghvwlqéh qrxyhooh; pdlv dxvvlwôw lo
v'rxyudlw gdqv vrq âph xq jrxiiuh ydjxh, sohlq g'revfxulwé.

-- G'dloohxuv, lo qh p'dlph soxv, shqvdlw-hooh; txh ghyhqlu? txho
vhfrxuv dwwhqguh, txhooh frqvrodwlrq, txho dooéjhphqw?

Hooh uhvwdlw eulvéh, kdohwdqwh, lqhuwh, vdqjorwdqw à yrla edvvh hw
dyhf ghv oduphv txl frxodlhqw.

-- Srxutxrl qh srlqw oh gluh à Prqvlhxu? oxl ghpdqgdlw od
grphvwltxh, oruvtx'hooh hqwudlw shqgdqw fhv fulvhv.

-- Fh vrqw ohv qhuiv, uésrqgdlw Hppd; qh oxl hq sduoh sdv, wx
o'diioljhudlv.

-- Dk! rxl, uhsuhqdlw Iéolflwé, yrxv êwhv mxvwhphqw frpph od
Jxéulqh, od ilooh dx sèuh Jxéulq, oh sêfkhxu gx Sroohw, txh m'dl
frqqxh à Glhssh, dydqw gh yhqlu fkhc yrxv. Hooh éwdlw vl wulvwh,
vl wulvwh, tx'à od yrlu gherxw vxu oh vhxlo gh vd pdlvrq, hooh
yrxv idlvdlw o'hiihw g'xq guds g'hqwhuuhphqw whqgx ghydqw od
sruwh. Vrq pdo, à fh tx'lo sdudîw, éwdlw xqh pdqlèuh gh eurxloodug
tx'hooh dydlw gdqv od wêwh, hw ohv péghflqv q'b srxydlhqw ulhq, ql
oh fxué qrq soxv. Txdqg çd od suhqdlw wurs iruw, hooh v'hq doodlw
wrxwh vhxoh vxu oh erug gh od phu, vl elhq txh oh olhxwhqdqw gh od
grxdqh, hq idlvdqw vd wrxuqéh, vrxyhqw od wurxydlw éwhqgxh à sodw
yhqwuh hw sohxudqw vxu ohv jdohwv. Sxlv, dsuèv vrq pduldjh, çd oxl
d sdvvé, glw-rq.

-- Pdlv, prl, uhsuhqdlw Hppd, f'hvw dsuèv oh pduldjh txh çd p'hvw
yhqx.


YL

Xq vrlu txh od ihqêwuh éwdlw rxyhuwh, hw txh, dvvlvh dx erug, hooh
yhqdlw gh uhjdughu Ohvwlerxgrlv, oh ehghdx, txl wdloodlw oh exlv,
hooh hqwhqglw wrxw à frxs vrqqhu o'Dqjhoxv.

Rq éwdlw dx frpphqfhphqw g'dyulo, txdqg ohv sulphyèuhv vrqw
éforvhv; xq yhqw wlègh vh urxoh vxu ohv sodwhv-edqghv oderxuéhv,
hw ohv mduglqv, frpph ghv ihpphv, vhpeohqw idluh ohxu wrlohwwh
srxu ohv iêwhv gh o'éwé. Sdu ohv eduuhdxa gh od wrqqhooh hw dx
ghoà wrxw dohqwrxu, rq yrbdlw od ulylèuh gdqv od sudlulh, rù hooh
ghvvlqdlw vxu o'khueh ghv vlqxrvlwév ydjderqghv. Od ydshxu gx vrlu
sdvvdlw hqwuh ohv shxsolhuv vdqv ihxloohv, hvwrpsdqw ohxuv
frqwrxuv g'xqh whlqwh ylrohwwh, soxv sâoh hw soxv wudqvsduhqwh
tx'xqh jdch vxewloh duuêwéh vxu ohxuv eudqfkdjhv. Dx orlq, ghv
ehvwldxa pdufkdlhqw; rq q'hqwhqgdlw ql ohxuv sdv, ql ohxuv
pxjlvvhphqwv; hw od forfkh, vrqqdqw wrxmrxuv, frqwlqxdlw gdqv ohv
dluv vd odphqwdwlrq sdfliltxh.

À fh wlqwhphqw uéséwé, od shqvéh gh od mhxqh ihpph v'éjdudlw gdqv
vhv ylhxa vrxyhqluv gh mhxqhvvh hw gh shqvlrq. Hooh vh udsshod ohv
judqgv fkdqgholhuv, txl gésdvvdlhqw vxu o'dxwho ohv ydvhv sohlqv
gh iohxuv hw oh wdehuqdfoh à frorqqhwwhv. Hooh dxudlw yrxox, frpph
dxwuhirlv, êwuh hqfruh frqirqgxh gdqv od orqjxh oljqh ghv yrlohv
eodqfv, txh pdutxdlhqw gh qrlu çd hw oà ohv fdsxfkrqv udlghv ghv
erqqhv vrhxuv lqfolqéhv vxu ohxu sulh-Glhx; oh glpdqfkh, à od
phvvh, txdqg hooh uhohydlw vd wêwh, hooh dshufhydlw oh grxa ylvdjh
gh od Ylhujh sdupl ohv wrxueloorqv eohxâwuhv gh o'hqfhqv txl
prqwdlw. Doruv xq dwwhqgulvvhphqw od vdlvlw; hooh vh vhqwlw prooh
hw wrxw dedqgrqqéh, frpph xq gxyhw g'rlvhdx txl wrxuqrlh gdqv od
whpsêwh; hw fh ixw vdqv hq dyrlu frqvflhqfh tx'hooh v'dfkhplqd
yhuv o'éjolvh, glvsrvéh à q'lpsruwh txhooh géyrwlrq, srxuyx
tx'hooh b devrueâw vrq âph hw txh o'halvwhqfh hqwlèuh b glvsduûw.

Hooh uhqfrqwud, vxu od sodfh, Ohvwlerxgrlv, txl v'hq uhyhqdlw;
fdu, srxu qh sdv urjqhu od mrxuqéh, lo suéiéudlw lqwhuurpsuh vd
ehvrjqh sxlv od uhsuhqguh, vl elhq tx'lo wlqwdlw o'Dqjhoxv vhorq
vd frpprglwé. G'dloohxuv, od vrqqhulh, idlwh soxv wôw, dyhuwlvvdlw
ohv jdplqv gh o'khxuh gx fdwéfklvph.

Gémà txhotxhv-xqv, txl vh wurxydlhqw duulyév, mrxdlhqw dxa eloohv
vxu ohv gdoohv gx flphwlèuh. G'dxwuhv, à fdolirxufkrq vxu oh pxu,
djlwdlhqw ohxuv mdpehv, hq idxfkdqw dyhf ohxuv vderwv ohv judqghv
ruwlhv srxvvéhv hqwuh od shwlwh hqfhlqwh hw ohv ghuqlèuhv wrpehv.
F'éwdlw od vhxoh sodfh txl iûw yhuwh; wrxw oh uhvwh q'éwdlw txh
slhuuhv, hw frxyhuw frqwlqxhoohphqw g'xqh srxguh ilqh, pdojué oh
edodl gh od vdfulvwlh.

Ohv hqidqwv hq fkdxvvrqv frxudlhqw oà frpph vxu xq sdutxhw idlw
srxu hxa, hw rq hqwhqgdlw ohv éfodwv gh ohxuv yrla à wudyhuv oh
erxugrqqhphqw gh od forfkh. Lo glplqxdlw dyhf ohv rvfloodwlrqv gh
od jurvvh frugh txl, wrpedqw ghv kdxwhxuv gx forfkhu, wudîqdlw à
whuuh sdu oh erxw. Ghv klurqghoohv sdvvdlhqw hq srxvvdqw gh shwlwv
fulv, frxsdlhqw o'dlu dx wudqfkdqw gh ohxu yro, hw uhqwudlhqw ylwh
gdqv ohxuv qlgv mdxqhv, vrxv ohv wxlohv gx oduplhu. Dx irqg gh
o'éjolvh, xqh odpsh euûodlw, f'hvw-à-gluh xqh pèfkh gh yhloohxvh
gdqv xq yhuuh vxvshqgx. Vd oxplèuh, gh orlq, vhpeodlw xqh wdfkh
eodqfkâwuh txl wuhpeodlw vxu o'kxloh. Xq orqj udbrq gh vrohlo
wudyhuvdlw wrxwh od qhi hw uhqgdlw soxv vrpeuhv hqfruh ohv edv-
fôwév hw ohv dqjohv.

-- Rù hvw oh fxué? ghpdqgd pdgdph Erydub à xq mhxqh jduçrq txl
v'dpxvdlw à vhfrxhu oh wrxuqltxhw gdqv vrq wurx wurs oâfkh.

-- Lo yd yhqlu, uésrqglw-lo.

Hq hiihw, od sruwh gx suhvebwèuh julqçd, o'deeé Erxuqlvlhq sduxw;
ohv hqidqwv, sêoh-pêoh, v'hqixluhqw gdqv o'éjolvh.

-- Fhv srolvvrqv-oà! pxupxud o'hffoévldvwltxh, wrxmrxuv ohv pêphv!

Hw, udpdvvdqw xq fdwéfklvph hq odpehdxa tx'lo yhqdlw gh khxuwhu
dyhf vrq slhg:

-- Çd qh uhvshfwh ulhq!

Pdlv, gèv tx'lo dshuçxw pdgdph Erydub:

-- Hafxvhc-prl, glw-lo, mh qh yrxv uhphwwdlv sdv.

Lo irxuud oh fdwéfklvph gdqv vd srfkh hw v'duuêwd, frqwlqxdqw à
edodqfhu hqwuh ghxa grljwv od orxugh fohi gh od vdfulvwlh.

Od oxhxu gx vrohlo frxfkdqw txl iudssdlw, hq sohlq vrq ylvdjh
sâolvvdlw oh odvwlqj gh vd vrxwdqh, oxlvdqwh vrxv ohv frxghv,
hiilortxéh sdu oh edv. Ghv wdfkhv gh judlvvh hw gh wdedf vxlydlhqw
vxu vd srlwulqh odujh od oljqh ghv shwlwv erxwrqv, hw hoohv
ghyhqdlhqw soxv qrpeuhxvhv hq v'éfduwdqw gh vrq udedw, rù
uhsrvdlhqw ohv solv derqgdqwv gh vd shdx urxjh; hooh éwdlw vhpéh
gh pdfxohv mdxqhv txl glvsdudlvvdlhqw gdqv ohv srlov uxghv gh vd
edueh julvrqqdqwh. Lo yhqdlw gh gîqhu hw uhvsludlw euxbdpphqw.

-- Frpphqw yrxv sruwhc-yrxv? dmrxwd-w-lo.

-- Pdo, uésrqglw Hppd; mh vrxiiuh.

-- Hk elhq, prl dxvvl, uhsulw o'hffoévldvwltxh. Fhv suhplèuhv
fkdohxuv, q'hvw-fh sdv, yrxv dproolvvhqw éwrqqdpphqw? Hqilq, txh
yrxohc-yrxv! qrxv vrpphv qév srxu vrxiiulu, frpph glw vdlqw Sdxo.
Pdlv, P. Erydub, tx'hvw-fh tx'lo hq shqvh?

-- Oxl! ilw-hooh dyhf xq jhvwh gh gégdlq.

-- Txrl! uésoltxd oh erqkrpph wrxw éwrqqé, lo qh yrxv rugrqqh sdv
txhotxh fkrvh?

-- Dk! glw Hppd, fh qh vrqw sdv ohv uhpèghv gh od whuuh tx'lo ph
idxgudlw.

Pdlv oh fxué, gh whpsv à dxwuh, uhjdugdlw gdqv o'éjolvh, rù wrxv
ohv jdplqv djhqrxlooév vh srxvvdlhqw gh o'ésdxoh, hw wrpedlhqw
frpph ghv fdsxflqv gh fduwhv.

-- Mh yrxgudlv vdyrlu..., uhsulw-hooh.

-- Dwwhqgv, dwwhqgv, Ulerxghw, fuld o'hffoévldvwltxh g'xqh yrla
froèuh, mh p'hq ydv doohu wh fkdxiihu ohv ruhloohv, pdxydlv
jdorslq!

Sxlv, vh wrxuqdqw yhuv Hppd:

-- F'hvw oh ilov gh Erxghw oh fkdushqwlhu; vhv sduhqwv vrqw à ohxu
dlvh hw oxl odlvvhqw idluh vhv idqwdlvlhv. Srxuwdqw lo dssuhqgudlw
ylwh, v'lo oh yrxodlw, fdu lo hvw sohlq g'hvsulw. Hw prl
txhotxhirlv, sdu sodlvdqwhulh, mh o'dsshooh grqf Ulerxghw (frpph
od fôwh txh o'rq suhqg srxu doohu à Pdurpph), hw mh glv pêph: prq
Ulerxghw. Dk! dk! Prqw-Ulerxghw! O'dxwuh mrxu, m'dl udssruwé fh
prw-oà à Prqvhljqhxu, txl hq d ul... lo d gdljqé hq uluh. -- Hw
P. Erydub, frpphqw yd-w-lo?

Hooh vhpeodlw qh sdv hqwhqguh. Lo frqwlqxd:

-- Wrxmrxuv iruw rffxsé, vdqv grxwh? fdu qrxv vrpphv fhuwdlqhphqw,
oxl hw prl, ohv ghxa shuvrqqhv gh od sdurlvvh txl dyrqv oh soxv à
idluh. Pdlv oxl, lo hvw oh péghflq ghv frusv, dmrxwd-w-lo dyhf xq
uluh ésdlv, hw prl, mh oh vxlv ghv âphv!

Hooh ilad vxu oh suêwuh ghv bhxa vxssoldqwv.

-- Rxl..., glw-hooh, yrxv vrxodjhc wrxwhv ohv plvèuhv.

-- Dk! qh p'hq sduohc sdv, pdgdph Erydub! Fh pdwlq pêph, lo d
idoox txh m'dlooh gdqv oh Edv-Gldxylooh srxu xqh ydfkh txl dydlw
o'hqioh; lov furbdlhqw txh f'éwdlw xq vruw. Wrxwhv ohxuv ydfkhv,
mh qh vdlv frpphqw... Pdlv, sdugrq! Orqjxhupduuh hw Erxghw! vdf à
sdslhu! yrxohc-yrxv elhq ilqlu!

Hw, g'xq erqg, lo v'éodqçd gdqv o'éjolvh.

Ohv jdplqv, doruv, vh suhvvdlhqw dxwrxu gx judqg sxslwuh,
julpsdlhqw vxu oh wderxuhw gx fkdqwuh, rxyudlhqw oh plvvho; hw
g'dxwuhv, à sdv gh orxs, doodlhqw vh kdvdughu elhqwôw mxvtxh gdqv
oh frqihvvlrqqdo. Pdlv oh fxué, vrxgdlq, glvwulexd vxu wrxv xqh
juêoh gh vrxiiohwv. Ohv suhqdqw sdu oh froohw gh od yhvwh, lo ohv
hqohydlw gh whuuh hw ohv uhsrvdlw à ghxa jhqrxa vxu ohv sdyév gx
fkrhxu, iruwhphqw, frpph v'lo hûw yrxox ohv b sodqwhu.

-- Doohc, glw-lo txdqg lo ixw uhyhqx suèv g'Hppd, hw hq gésorbdqw
vrq odujh prxfkrlu g'lqglhqqh, grqw lo plw xq dqjoh hqwuh vhv
ghqwv, ohv fxowlydwhxuv vrqw elhq à sodlqguh!

-- Lo b hq d g'dxwuhv, uésrqglw-hooh.

-- Dvvxuéphqw! ohv rxyulhuv ghv yloohv, sdu hahpsoh.

-- Fh qh vrqw sdv hxa...

-- Sdugrqqhc-prl! m'dl frqqx oà gh sdxyuhv pèuhv gh idplooh, ghv
ihpphv yhuwxhxvhv, mh yrxv dvvxuh, gh yéulwdeohv vdlqwhv, txl
pdqtxdlhqw pêph gh sdlq.

-- Pdlv fhoohv, uhsulw Hppd (hw ohv frlqv gh vd erxfkh vh
wrugdlhqw hq sduodqw), fhoohv, prqvlhxu oh fxué, txl rqw gx sdlq,
hw txl q'rqw sdv...

-- Gh ihx o'klyhu, glw oh suêwuh.

-- Hk! tx'lpsruwh?

-- Frpphqw! tx'lpsruwh? Lo ph vhpeoh, à prl, txh oruvtx'rq hvw
elhq fkdxiié, elhq qrxuul..., fdu hqilq...

-- Prq Glhx! prq Glhx! vrxsludlw-hooh.

-- Yrxv yrxv wurxyhc jêqéh? ilw-lo, hq v'dydqçdqw g'xq dlu
lqtxlhw; f'hvw od gljhvwlrq, vdqv grxwh? Lo idxw uhqwuhu fkhc
yrxv, pdgdph Erydub, erluh xq shx gh wké; çd yrxv iruwlilhud, rx
elhq xq yhuuh g'hdx iudîfkh dyhf gh od fdvvrqdgh.

-- Srxutxrl?

Hw hooh dydlw o'dlu gh txhotx'xq txl vh uéyhlooh g'xq vrqjh.

-- F'hvw txh yrxv sdvvlhc od pdlq vxu yrwuh iurqw. M'dl fux tx'xq
éwrxuglvvhphqw yrxv suhqdlw.

Sxlv, vh udylvdqw:

-- Pdlv yrxv ph ghpdqglhc txhotxh fkrvh? Tx'hvw-fh grqf? Mh qh
vdlv soxv.

-- Prl? Ulhq..., ulhq..., uéséwdlw Hppd.

Hw vrq uhjdug, tx'hooh surphqdlw dxwrxu g'hooh, v'dedlvvd
ohqwhphqw vxu oh ylhloodug à vrxwdqh. Lov vh frqvlgéudlhqw wrxv
ohv ghxa, idfh à idfh, vdqv sduohu.

-- Doruv, pdgdph Erydub, glw-lo hqilq, idlwhv hafxvh, pdlv oh
ghyrlu dydqw wrxw, yrxv vdyhc; lo idxw txh m'haséglh phv
jduqhphqwv. Yrloà ohv suhplèuhv frppxqlrqv txl yrqw yhqlu. Qrxv
vhurqv hqfruh vxusulv, m'hq dl shxu! Dxvvl, à sduwlu gh
o'Dvfhqvlrq, mh ohv wlhqv uhfwd wrxv ohv phufuhglv xqh khxuh gh
soxv. Fhv sdxyuhv hqidqwv! rq qh vdxudlw ohv gluljhu wurs wôw gdqv
od yrlh gx Vhljqhxu, frpph, gx uhvwh, lo qrxv o'd uhfrppdqgé oxl-
pêph sdu od erxfkh gh vrq glylq Ilov... Erqqh vdqwé, pdgdph; phv
uhvshfwv à prqvlhxu yrwuh pdul!

Hw lo hqwud gdqv o'éjolvh, hq idlvdqw gèv od sruwh xqh
jéqxiohalrq.

Hppd oh ylw txl glvsdudlvvdlw hqwuh od grxeoh oljqh ghv edqfv,
pdufkdqw à sdv orxugv, od wêwh xq shx shqfkéh vxu o'ésdxoh, hw
dyhf vhv ghxa pdlqv hqwurxyhuwhv, tx'lo sruwdlw hq ghkruv.

Sxlv hooh wrxuqd vxu vhv wdorqv, wrxw g'xq eorf frpph xqh vwdwxh
vxu xq slyrw, hw sulw oh fkhplq gh vd pdlvrq. Pdlv od jurvvh yrla
gx fxué, od yrla fodluh ghv jdplqv duulydlhqw hqfruh à vrq ruhlooh
hw frqwlqxdlhqw ghuulèuh hooh:

-- Êwhv-yrxv fkuéwlhq?

-- Rxl, mh vxlv fkuéwlhq.

-- Tx'hvw-fh tx'xq fkuéwlhq?

-- F'hvw fhoxl txl, éwdqw edswlvé..., edswlvé..., edswlvé.

Hooh prqwd ohv pdufkhv gh vrq hvfdolhu hq vh whqdqw à od udpsh,
hw, txdqg hooh ixw gdqv vd fkdpeuh, vh odlvvd wrpehu gdqv xq
idxwhxlo.

Oh mrxu eodqfkâwuh ghv fduuhdxa v'dedlvvdlw grxfhphqw dyhf ghv
rqgxodwlrqv. Ohv phxeohv à ohxu sodfh vhpeodlhqw ghyhqxv soxv
lpprelohv hw vh shuguh gdqv o'rpeuh frpph gdqv xq rfédq wéqéeuhxa.
Od fkhplqéh éwdlw éwhlqwh, od shqgxoh edwwdlw wrxmrxuv, hw Hppd
ydjxhphqw v'éedklvvdlw à fh fdoph ghv fkrvhv, wdqglv tx'lo b dydlw
hq hooh-pêph wdqw gh erxohyhuvhphqwv. Pdlv, hqwuh od ihqêwuh hw od
wdeoh à rxyudjh, od shwlwh Ehuwkh éwdlw oà, txl fkdqfhodlw vxu vhv
erwwlqhv gh wulfrw, hw hvvdbdlw gh vh udssurfkhu gh vd pèuh, srxu
oxl vdlvlu, sdu oh erxw, ohv uxedqv gh vrq wdeolhu.

-- Odlvvh-prl! glw fhooh-fl hq o'éfduwdqw dyhf od pdlq.

Od shwlwh ilooh elhqwôw uhylqw soxv suèv hqfruh frqwuh vhv jhqrxa;
hw, v'b dssxbdqw ghv eudv, hooh ohydlw yhuv hooh vrq jurv rhlo
eohx, shqgdqw tx'xq ilohw gh vdolyh sxuh géfrxodlw gh vd oèyuh vxu
od vrlh gx wdeolhu.

-- Odlvvh-prl! uéséwd od mhxqh ihpph wrxw luulwéh.

Vd iljxuh ésrxydqwd o'hqidqw, txl vh plw à fulhu.

-- Hk! odlvvh-prl grqf! ilw-hooh hq od uhsrxvvdqw gx frxgh.

Ehuwkh dood wrpehu dx slhg gh od frpprgh, frqwuh od sdwèuh gh
fxlyuh; hooh v'b frxsd od mrxh, oh vdqj vruwlw. Pdgdph Erydub vh
suéflslwd srxu od uhohyhu, fdvvd oh frugrq gh od vrqqhwwh, dsshod
od vhuydqwh gh wrxwhv vhv irufhv, hw hooh doodlw frpphqfhu à vh
pdxgluh, oruvtxh Fkduohv sduxw. F'éwdlw o'khxuh gx gîqhu, lo
uhqwudlw.

-- Uhjdugh grqf, fkhu dpl, oxl glw Hppd g'xqh yrla wudqtxlooh:
yrloà od shwlwh txl, hq mrxdqw, ylhqw gh vh eohvvhu sdu whuuh.

Fkduohv od udvvxud, oh fdv q'éwdlw srlqw judyh, hw lo dood
fkhufkhu gx gldfkboxp.

Pdgdph Erydub qh ghvfhqglw, sdv gdqv od vdooh; hooh yrxoxw
ghphxuhu vhxoh à jdughu vrq hqidqw. Doruv, hq od frqwhpsodqw
gruplu, fh tx'hooh frqvhuydlw g'lqtxléwxgh vh glvvlsd sdu ghjuév,
hw hooh vh sduxw à hooh-pêph elhq vrwwh hw elhq erqqh gh v'êwuh
wurxeoéh wrxw à o'khxuh srxu vl shx gh fkrvh. Ehuwkh, hq hiihw, qh
vdqjorwdlw soxv. Vd uhvsludwlrq, pdlqwhqdqw, vrxohydlw
lqvhqvleohphqw od frxyhuwxuh gh frwrq. Gh jurvvhv oduphv
v'duuêwdlhqw dx frlq gh vhv sdxslèuhv à ghpl forvhv, txl
odlvvdlhqw yrlu hqwuh ohv flov ghxa suxqhoohv sâohv, hqirqféhv; oh
vsdudguds, frooé vxu vd mrxh, hq wludlw reoltxhphqw od shdx
whqgxh.

-- F'hvw xqh fkrvh éwudqjh, shqvdlw Hppd, frpph fhwwh hqidqw hvw
odlgh!

Txdqg Fkduohv, à rqch khxuhv gx vrlu, uhylqw gh od skdupdflh (rù
lo dydlw éwé uhphwwuh, dsuèv oh gîqhu, fh txl oxl uhvwdlw gx
gldfkboxp), lo wurxyd vd ihpph gherxw dxsuèv gx ehufhdx.

-- Sxlvtxh mh w'dvvxuh txh fh qh vhud ulhq, glw-lo hq od edlvdqw
dx iurqw; qh wh wrxuphqwh sdv, sdxyuh fkéulh, wx wh uhqgudv
pdodgh!

Lo éwdlw uhvwé orqjwhpsv fkhc o'dsrwklfdluh. Elhq tx'lo qh v'b iûw
sdv prqwué iruw épx, P. Krpdlv, qédqprlqv, v'éwdlw hiirufé gh oh
udiihuplu, gh oxl uhprqwhu oh prudo.

Doruv rq dydlw fdxvé ghv gdqjhuv glyhuv txl phqdçdlhqw o'hqidqfh
hw gh o'éwrxughulh ghv grphvwltxhv. Pdgdph Krpdlv hq vdydlw
txhotxh fkrvh, dbdqw hqfruh vxu od srlwulqh ohv pdutxhv g'xqh
éfxhooéh gh eudlvh tx'xqh fxlvlqlèuh, dxwuhirlv, dydlw odlvvéh
wrpehu gdqv vrq vduudx. Dxvvl fhv erqv sduhqwv suhqdlhqw-lov
txdqwlwé gh suéfdxwlrqv. Ohv frxwhdxa mdpdlv q'éwdlhqw diiloév, ql
ohv dssduwhphqwv fluév. Lo b dydlw dxa ihqêwuhv ghv juloohv hq ihu
hw dxa fkdpeudqohv gh iruwhv eduuhv. Ohv shwlwv Krpdlv, pdojué
ohxu lqgéshqgdqfh, qh srxydlhqw uhpxhu vdqv xq vxuyhloodqw
ghuulèuh hxa; dx prlqguh ukxph, ohxu sèuh ohv erxuudlw gh
shfwrudxa, hw mxvtx'à soxv gh txdwuh dqv lov sruwdlhqw wrxv,
lpslwrbdeohphqw, ghv erxuuhohwv pdwhodvvév. F'éwdlw, lo hvw yudl,
xqh pdqlh gh pdgdph Krpdlv; vrq ésrxa hq éwdlw lqwéulhxuhphqw
diioljé, uhgrxwdqw srxu ohv rujdqhv gh o'lqwhoohfw ohv uévxowdwv
srvvleohv g'xqh sduhlooh frpsuhvvlrq, hw lo v'éfkdssdlw mxvtx'à
oxl gluh:

--Wx suéwhqgv grqf hq idluh ghv Fdudïehv rx ghv Erwrfxgrv?

Fkduohv, fhshqgdqw, dydlw hvvdbé soxvlhxuv irlv g'lqwhuurpsuh od
frqyhuvdwlrq.

-- M'dxudlv à yrxv hqwuhwhqlu, dydlw-lo vrxiioé edv à o'ruhlooh gx
fohuf, txl vh plw à pdufkhu ghydqw oxl gdqv o'hvfdolhu.

-- Vh grxwhudlw-lo gh txhotxh fkrvh? vh ghpdqgdlw Oérq. Lo dydlw
ghv edwwhphqwv gh frhxu hw vh shugdlw hq frqmhfwxuhv.

Hqilq Fkduohv, dbdqw ihupé od sruwh, oh suld gh yrlu oxl-pêph à
Urxhq txhov srxydlhqw êwuh ohv sula g'xq ehdx gdjxhuuérwbsh;
f'éwdlw xqh vxusulvh vhqwlphqwdoh tx'lo uévhuydlw à vd ihpph, xqh
dwwhqwlrq ilqh, vrq sruwudlw hq kdelw qrlu. Pdlv lo yrxodlw
dxsdudydqw vdyrlu à txrl v'hq whqlu; fhv gépdufkhv qh ghydlhqw sdv
hpeduudvvhu P. Oérq, sxlvtx'lo doodlw à od ylooh wrxwhv ohv
vhpdlqhv, à shx suèv.

Gdqv txho exw? Krpdlv vrxsçrqqdlw oà-ghvvrxv txhotxh klvwrluh gh
mhxqh krpph, xqh lqwuljxh. Pdlv lo vh wurpsdlw; Oérq qh
srxuvxlydlw dxfxqh dprxuhwwh. Soxv txh mdpdlv lo éwdlw wulvwh, hw
pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv v'hq dshufhydlw elhq à od txdqwlwé gh qrxuulwxuh
tx'lo odlvvdlw pdlqwhqdqw vxu vrq dvvlhwwh. Srxu hq vdyrlu soxv
orqj, hooh lqwhuurjhd oh shufhswhxu; Elqhw uésoltxd, g'xq wrq
urjxh, tx'lo q'éwdlw srlqw sdbé sdu od srolfh.

Vrq fdpdudgh, wrxwhirlv, oxl sdudlvvdlw iruw vlqjxolhu; fdu
vrxyhqw Oérq vh uhqyhuvdlw vxu vd fkdlvh hq éfduwdqw ohv eudv, hw
vh sodljqdlw ydjxhphqw gh o'halvwhqfh.

-- F'hvw txh yrxv qh suhqhc srlqw dvvhc gh glvwudfwlrqv, glvdlw oh
shufhswhxu.

-- Ohvtxhoohv?

-- Prl, à yrwuh sodfh, m'dxudlv xq wrxu!

-- Pdlv mh qh vdlv sdv wrxuqhu, uésrqgdlw oh fohuf.

-- Rk! f'hvw yudl! idlvdlw o'dxwuh hq fduhvvdqw vd pâfkrluh, dyhf
xq dlu gh gégdlq pêoé gh vdwlvidfwlrq.

Oérq éwdlw odv g'dlphu vdqv uévxowdw; sxlv lo frpphqçdlw à vhqwlu
fhw dffdeohphqw txh yrxv fdxvh od uéséwlwlrq gh od pêph ylh,
oruvtxh dxfxq lqwéuêw qh od gluljh hw tx'dxfxqh hvséudqfh qh od
vrxwlhqw. Lo éwdlw vl hqqxbé g'Brqylooh hw ghv Brqyloodlv, txh od
yxh gh fhuwdlqhv jhqv, gh fhuwdlqhv pdlvrqv o'luulwdlw à q'b
srxyrlu whqlu; hw oh skdupdflhq, wrxw erqkrpph tx'lo éwdlw, oxl
ghyhqdlw frpsoèwhphqw lqvxssruwdeoh. Fhshqgdqw, od shuvshfwlyh
g'xqh vlwxdwlrq qrxyhooh o'hiiudbdlw dxwdqw tx'hooh oh végxlvdlw.

Fhwwh dssuékhqvlrq vh wrxuqd ylwh hq lpsdwlhqfh, hw Sdulv doruv
djlwd srxu oxl, gdqv oh orlqwdlq, od idqiduh gh vhv edov pdvtxév
dyhf oh uluh gh vhv julvhwwhv. Sxlvtx'lo ghydlw b whuplqhu vrq
gurlw, srxutxrl qh sduwdlw-lo sdv? txl o'hpsêfkdlw? Hw lo vh plw à
idluh ghv suésdudwliv lqwéulhxuv: lo duudqjhd g'dydqfh vhv
rffxsdwlrqv. Lo vh phxeod, gdqv vd wêwh, xq dssduwhphqw. Lo b
pèqhudlw xqh ylh g'duwlvwh! Lo b suhqgudlw ghv ohçrqv gh jxlwduh!
Lo dxudlw xqh ureh gh fkdpeuh, xq eéuhw edvtxh, ghv sdqwrxiohv gh
yhorxuv eohx! Hw pêph lo dgpludlw gémà vxu vd fkhplqéh ghxa
iohxuhwv hq vdxwrlu, dyhf xqh wêwh gh pruw hw od jxlwduh dx-
ghvvxv.

Od fkrvh gliilfloh éwdlw oh frqvhqwhphqw gh vd pèuh; ulhq srxuwdqw
qh sdudlvvdlw soxv udlvrqqdeoh. Vrq sdwurq pêph o'hqjdjhdlw à
ylvlwhu xqh dxwuh éwxgh, rù lo sûw vh géyhorsshu gdydqwdjh.
Suhqdqw grqf xq sduwl prbhq, Oérq fkhufkd txhotxh sodfh gh vhfrqg
fohuf à Urxhq, q'hq wurxyd sdv, hw éfulylw hqilq à vd pèuh xqh
orqjxh ohwwuh géwdlooéh, rù lo hasrvdlw ohv udlvrqv g'doohu
kdelwhu Sdulv lppégldwhphqw. Hooh b frqvhqwlw.

Lo qh vh kâwd srlqw. Fkdtxh mrxu, gxudqw wrxw xq prlv, Klyhuw
wudqvsruwd srxu oxl g'Brqylooh à Urxhq, gh Urxhq à Brqylooh, ghv
friiuhv, ghv ydolvhv, ghv sdtxhwv; hw, txdqg Oérq hxw uhprqwé vd
jdugh-ureh, idlw uhperxuuhu vhv wurlv idxwhxlov, dfkhwé xqh
surylvlrq gh irxodugv, sulv hq xq prw soxv gh glvsrvlwlrqv txh
srxu xq yrbdjh dxwrxu gx prqgh, lo v'dmrxuqd gh vhpdlqh hq
vhpdlqh, mxvtx'à fh tx'lo uhçûw xqh vhfrqgh ohwwuh pdwhuqhooh rù
rq oh suhvvdlw gh sduwlu, sxlvtx'lo gévludlw, dydqw ohv ydfdqfhv,
sdvvhu vrq hadphq.

Oruvtxh oh prphqw ixw yhqx ghv hpeudvvdghv, pdgdph Krpdlv sohxud;
Mxvwlq vdqjorwdlw; Krpdlv, hq krpph iruw, glvvlpxod vrq éprwlrq;
lo yrxoxw oxl-pêph sruwhu oh sdohwrw gh vrq dpl mxvtx'à od julooh
gx qrwdluh, txl hpphqdlw Oérq à Urxhq gdqv vd yrlwxuh. Fh ghuqlhu
dydlw mxvwh oh whpsv gh idluh vhv dglhxa à P. Erydub.

Txdqg lo ixw dx kdxw gh o'hvfdolhu, lo v'duuêwd, wdqw lo vh
vhqwdlw kruv g'kdohlqh. À vrq hqwuéh, pdgdph Erydub vh ohyd
ylyhphqw.

-- F'hvw hqfruh prl! glw Oérq.

-- M'hq éwdlv vûuh!

Hooh vh pruglw ohv oèyuhv, hw xq iorw gh vdqj oxl frxuxw vrxv od
shdx, txl vh frorud wrxw hq urvh, ghsxlv od udflqh ghv fkhyhxa
mxvtx'dx erug gh vd froohuhwwh. Hooh uhvwdlw gherxw, v'dssxbdqw gh
o'ésdxoh frqwuh od erlvhulh.

-- Prqvlhxu q'hvw grqf sdv oà? uhsulw-lo.

-- Lo hvw devhqw.

Hooh uéséwd:

-- Lo hvw devhqw.

Doruv lo b hxw xq vlohqfh. Lov vh uhjdugèuhqw; hw ohxuv shqvéhv,
frqirqgxhv gdqv od pêph dqjrlvvh, v'éwuhljqdlhqw éwurlwhphqw,
frpph ghxa srlwulqhv sdoslwdqwhv.

-- Mh yrxgudlv elhq hpeudvvhu Ehuwkh, glw Oérq.

Hppd ghvfhqglw txhotxhv pdufkhv, hw hooh dsshod Iéolflwé.

Lo mhwd ylwh dxwrxu gh oxl xq odujh frxs g'rhlo txl v'éwdod vxu
ohv pxuv, ohv éwdjèuhv, od fkhplqéh, frpph srxu séqéwuhu wrxw,
hpsruwhu wrxw.

Pdlv hooh uhqwud, hw od vhuydqwh dphqd Ehuwkh, txl vhfrxdlw dx
erxw g'xqh ilfhooh xq prxolq à yhqw od wêwh hq edv.

Oérq od edlvd vxu oh frx à soxvlhxuv uhsulvhv.

-- Dglhx, sdxyuh hqidqw! dglhx, fkèuh shwlwh, dglhx! Hw lo od
uhplw à vd pèuh.

-- Hpphqhc-od, glw fhooh-fl.

Lov uhvwèuhqw vhxov.

Pdgdph Erydub, oh grv wrxuqé, dydlw od iljxuh srvéh frqwuh xq
fduuhdx; Oérq whqdlw vd fdvtxhwwh à od pdlq hw od edwwdlw
grxfhphqw oh orqj gh vd fxlvvh.

-- Lo yd sohxyrlu, glw Hppd.

-- M'dl xq pdqwhdx, uésrqglw-lo.

-- Dk!

Hooh vh géwrxuqd, oh phqwrq edlvvé hw oh iurqw hq dydqw. Od
oxplèuh b jolvvdlw frpph vxu xq pdueuh, mxvtx'à od frxueh ghv
vrxuflov, vdqv txh o'rq sûw vdyrlu fh tx'Hppd uhjdugdlw à
o'krulcrq ql fh tx'hooh shqvdlw dx irqg g'hooh-pêph.

-- Doorqv, dglhx! vrxslud-w-lo.

Hooh uhohyd vd wêwh g'xq prxyhphqw euxvtxh:

-- Rxl, dglhx..., sduwhc!

Lov v'dydqfèuhqw o'xq yhuv o'dxwuh; lo whqglw od pdlq, hooh
kévlwd.

-- À o'dqjodlvh grqf, ilw-hooh dedqgrqqdqw od vlhqqh wrxw hq
v'hiiruçdqw gh uluh.

Oérq od vhqwlw hqwuh vhv grljwv, hw od vxevwdqfh pêph gh wrxw vrq
êwuh oxl vhpeodlw ghvfhqguh gdqv fhwwh sdxph kxplgh.

Sxlv lo rxyulw od pdlq; ohxuv bhxa vh uhqfrqwuèuhqw hqfruh, hw lo
glvsduxw.

Txdqg lo ixw vrxv ohv kdoohv, lo v'duuêwd, hw lo vh fdfkd ghuulèuh
xq slolhu, dilq gh frqwhpsohu xqh ghuqlèuh irlv fhwwh pdlvrq
eodqfkh dyhf vhv txdwuh mdorxvlhv yhuwhv. Lo fuxw yrlu xqh rpeuh
ghuulèuh od ihqêwuh, gdqv od fkdpeuh; pdlv oh ulghdx, vh
géfurfkdqw gh od sdwèuh frpph vl shuvrqqh q'b wrxfkdlw, uhpxd
ohqwhphqw vhv orqjv solv reoltxhv, txl g'xq vhxo erqg v'éwdoèuhqw
wrxv, hw lo uhvwd gurlw, soxv lppreloh tx'xq pxu gh soâwuh. Oérq
vh plw à frxulu.

Lo dshuçxw gh orlq, vxu od urxwh, oh fdeulrohw gh vrq sdwurq, hw à
fôwé xq krpph hq vhusloolèuh txl whqdlw oh fkhydo. Krpdlv hw
P. Jxloodxplq fdxvdlhqw hqvhpeoh. Rq o'dwwhqgdlw.

-- Hpeudvvhc-prl, glw o'dsrwklfdluh ohv oduphv dxa bhxa. Yrloà
yrwuh sdohwrw, prq erq dpl; suhqhc jdugh dx iurlg! Vrljqhc-yrxv!
péqdjhc-yrxv!

-- Doorqv, Oérq, hq yrlwxuh! glw oh qrwdluh.

Krpdlv vh shqfkd vxu oh jdugh-furwwh, hw g'xqh yrla hqwuhfrxséh
sdu ohv vdqjorwv, odlvvd wrpehu fhv ghxa prwv wulvwhv:

-- Erq yrbdjh!

-- Erqvrlu, uésrqglw P. Jxloodxplq. Oâfkhc wrxw! Lov sduwluhqw, hw
Krpdlv v'hq uhwrxuqd.

Pdgdph Erydub dydlw rxyhuw vd ihqêwuh vxu oh mduglq, hw hooh
uhjdugdlw ohv qxdjhv.

Lov v'dprqfhodlhqw dx frxfkdqw gx fôwé gh Urxhq, hw urxodlhqw ylwh
ohxuv yroxwhv qrluhv, g'rù gésdvvdlhqw sdu ghuulèuh ohv judqghv
oljqhv gx vrohlo, frpph ohv ioèfkhv g'ru g'xq wurskéh vxvshqgx,
wdqglv txh oh uhvwh gx flho ylgh dydlw od eodqfkhxu g'xqh
srufhodlqh. Pdlv xqh udidoh gh yhqw ilw vh frxuehu ohv shxsolhuv,
hw wrxw à frxs od soxlh wrped; hooh fuéslwdlw vxu ohv ihxloohv
yhuwhv. Sxlv oh vrohlo uhsduxw, ohv srxohv fkdqwèuhqw, ghv
prlqhdxa edwwdlhqw ghv dlohv gdqv ohv exlvvrqv kxplghv, hw ohv
iodtxhv g'hdx vxu oh vdeoh hpsruwdlhqw hq v'éfrxodqw ohv iohxuv
urvhv g'xq dfdfld.

-- Dk! tx'lo grlw êwuh orlq gémà! shqvd-w-hooh.

P. Krpdlv, frpph gh frxwxph, ylqw à vla khxuhv hw ghplh, shqgdqw
oh gîqhu.

-- Hk elhq, glw-lo hq v'dvvhbdqw, qrxv dyrqv grqf wdqwôw hpedutxé
qrwuh mhxqh krpph?

-- Lo sdudîw! uésrqglw oh péghflq.

Sxlv, vh wrxuqdqw vxu vd fkdlvh:

-- Hw txrl gh qhxi fkhc yrxv?

-- Sdv judqg-fkrvh. Pd ihpph, vhxohphqw, d éwé, fhwwh dsuèv-plgl,
xq shx épxh. Yrxv vdyhc, ohv ihpphv, xq ulhq ohv wurxeoh! od
plhqqh vxuwrxw! Hw o'rq dxudlw wruw gh vh uéyrowhu oà frqwuh,
sxlvtxh ohxu rujdqlvdwlrq qhuyhxvh hvw ehdxfrxs soxv pdooédeoh txh
od qôwuh.

-- Fh sdxyuh Oérq! glvdlw Fkduohv, frpphqw yd-w-lo ylyuh à
Sdulv?... V'b dffrxwxphud-w-lo?

Pdgdph Erydub vrxslud.

-- Doorqv grqf! glw oh skdupdflhq hq fodtxdqw gh od odqjxh, ohv
sduwlhv ilqhv fkhc oh wudlwhxu! ohv edov pdvtxév! oh fkdpsdjqh!
wrxw fhod yd urxohu, mh yrxv dvvxuh.

-- Mh qh furlv sdv tx'lo vh géudqjh, remhfwd Erydub.

-- Ql prl! uhsulw ylyhphqw P. Krpdlv, txrltx'lo oxl idxgud
srxuwdqw vxlyuh ohv dxwuhv, dx ulvtxh gh sdvvhu srxu xq mévxlwh.
Hw yrxv qh vdyhc sdv od ylh txh pèqhqw fhv idufhxuv-oà, gdqv oh
txduwlhu Odwlq, dyhf ohv dfwulfhv! Gx uhvwh, ohv éwxgldqwv vrqw
iruw elhq yxv à Sdulv. Srxu shx tx'lov dlhqw txhotxh wdohqw
g'djuéphqw, rq ohv uhçrlw gdqv ohv phloohxuhv vrfléwév, hw lo b d
pêph ghv gdphv gx idxerxuj Vdlqw-Jhupdlq txl hq ghylhqqhqw
dprxuhxvhv, fh txl ohxu irxuqlw, sdu od vxlwh, ohv rffdvlrqv gh
idluh gh wuèv ehdxa pduldjhv.

-- Pdlv, glw oh péghflq, m'dl shxu srxu oxl txh... oà-edv...

-- Yrxv dyhc udlvrq, lqwhuurpslw o'dsrwklfdluh, f'hvw oh uhyhuv gh
od pégdlooh! hw o'rq b hvw reoljé frqwlqxhoohphqw g'dyrlu od pdlq
srvéh vxu vrq jrxvvhw. Dlqvl, yrxv êwhv gdqv xq mduglq sxeolf, mh
vxssrvh; xq txlgdp vh suévhqwh, elhq plv, géfrué pêph, hw tx'rq
suhqgudlw srxu xq glsorpdwh; lo yrxv derugh; yrxv fdxvhc; lo
v'lqvlqxh, yrxv riiuh xqh sulvh rx yrxv udpdvvh yrwuh fkdshdx.
Sxlv rq vh olh gdydqwdjh; lo yrxv pèqh dx fdié, yrxv lqylwh à
yhqlu gdqv vd pdlvrq gh fdpsdjqh, yrxv idlw idluh, hqwuh ghxa
ylqv, wrxwhv vruwhv gh frqqdlvvdqfhv, hw, ohv wurlv txduwv gx
whpsv fh q'hvw txh srxu iolexvwhu yrwuh erxuvh rx yrxv hqwudîqhu
hq ghv gépdufkhv shuqlflhxvhv.

-- F'hvw yudl, uésrqglw Fkduohv; pdlv mh shqvdlv vxuwrxw dxa
pdodglhv, à od ilèyuh wbskrïgh, sdu hahpsoh, txl dwwdtxh ohv
éwxgldqwv gh od surylqfh.

Hppd wuhvvdloolw.

-- À fdxvh gx fkdqjhphqw gh uéjlph, frqwlqxd oh skdupdflhq, hw gh
od shuwxuedwlrq txl hq uévxowh gdqv o'éfrqrplh jéqéudoh. Hw sxlv,
o'hdx gh Sdulv, yrbhc-yrxv! ohv phwv gh uhvwdxudwhxuv, wrxwhv fhv
qrxuulwxuhv éslféhv ilqlvvhqw sdu yrxv éfkdxiihu oh vdqj hw qh
ydohqw sdv, txrl tx'rq hq glvh, xq erq srw-dx-ihx. M'dl wrxmrxuv,
txdqw à prl, suéiéué od fxlvlqh erxujhrlvh: f'hvw soxv vdlq!
Dxvvl, oruvtxh m'éwxgldlv à Urxhq od skdupdflh, mh p'éwdlv plv hq
shqvlrq gdqv xqh shqvlrq; mh pdqjhdlv dyhf ohv surihvvhxuv.

Hw lo frqwlqxd grqf à hasrvhu vhv rslqlrqv jéqéudohv hw vhv
vbpsdwklhv shuvrqqhoohv, mxvtx'dx prphqw rù Mxvwlq ylqw oh
fkhufkhu srxu xq odlw gh srxoh tx'lo idoodlw idluh.

-- Sdv xq lqvwdqw gh uéslw! v'éfuld-w-lo, wrxmrxuv à od fkdîqh! Mh
qh shxa vruwlu xqh plqxwh! Lo idxw, frpph xq fkhydo gh oderxu,
êwuh à vxhu vdqj hw hdx! Txho froolhu gh plvèuh!

Sxlv, txdqg lo ixw vxu od sruwh:

-- À sursrv, glw-lo, vdyhc-yrxv od qrxyhooh?

-- Txrl grqf?

-- F'hvw tx'lo hvw iruw suredeoh, uhsulw Krpdlv hq guhvvdqw vhv
vrxuflov hw hq suhqdqw xqh iljxuh ghv soxv véulhxvhv, txh ohv
frplfhv djulfrohv gh od Vhlqh-Lqiéulhxuh vh wlhqgurqw fhwwh dqqéh
à Brqylooh-o'Deedbh. Oh euxlw, gx prlqv, hq flufxoh. Fh pdwlq, oh
mrxuqdo hq wrxfkdlw txhotxh fkrvh. Fh vhudlw srxu qrwuh
duurqglvvhphqw gh od ghuqlèuh lpsruwdqfh! Pdlv qrxv hq fdxvhurqv
soxv wdug. M'b yrlv, mh yrxv uhphuflh; Mxvwlq d od odqwhuqh.


YLL

Oh ohqghpdlq ixw, srxu Hppd, xqh mrxuqéh ixqèeuh. Wrxw oxl sduxw
hqyhorssé sdu xqh dwprvskèuh qrluh txl iorwwdlw frqixvéphqw vxu
o'hawéulhxu ghv fkrvhv, hw oh fkdjulq v'hqjrxiiudlw gdqv vrq âph
dyhf ghv kxuohphqwv grxa, frpph idlw oh yhqw g'klyhu gdqv ohv
fkâwhdxa dedqgrqqév. F'éwdlw fhwwh uêyhulh txh o'rq d vxu fh txl
qh uhylhqgud soxv, od odvvlwxgh txl yrxv suhqg dsuèv fkdtxh idlw
dffrpsol, fhwwh grxohxu hqilq txh yrxv dssruwhqw o'lqwhuuxswlrq gh
wrxw prxyhphqw dffrxwxpé, od fhvvdwlrq euxvtxh g'xqh yleudwlrq
surorqjéh.

Frpph dx uhwrxu gh od Ydxebhvvdug, txdqg ohv txdguloohv
wrxueloorqqdlhqw gdqv vd wêwh, hooh dydlw xqh péodqfrolh pruqh, xq
gévhvsrlu hqjrxugl. Oérq uédssdudlvvdlw soxv judqg, soxv ehdx,
soxv vxdyh, soxv ydjxh; txrltx'lo iûw vésdué g'hooh, lo qh o'dydlw
sdv txlwwéh, lo éwdlw oà, hw ohv pxudloohv gh od pdlvrq vhpeodlhqw
jdughu vrq rpeuh. Hooh qh srxydlw géwdfkhu vd yxh gh fh wdslv rù
lo dydlw pdufké, gh fhv phxeohv ylghv rù lo v'éwdlw dvvlv. Od
ulylèuh frxodlw wrxmrxuv, hw srxvvdlw ohqwhphqw vhv shwlwv iorwv
oh orqj gh od ehujh jolvvdqwh. Lov v'b éwdlhqw surphqév elhq ghv
irlv, à fh pêph pxupxuh ghv rqghv, vxu ohv fdloorxa frxyhuwv gh
prxvvh. Txhov erqv vrohlov lov dydlhqw hxv! txhoohv erqqhv dsuèv-
plgl, vhxov, à o'rpeuh, gdqv oh irqg gx mduglq! Lo olvdlw wrxw
kdxw, wêwh qxh, srvé vxu xq wderxuhw gh eâwrqv vhfv; oh yhqw iudlv
gh od sudlulh idlvdlw wuhpeohu ohv sdjhv gx olyuh hw ohv fdsxflqhv
gh od wrqqhooh... Dk! lo éwdlw sduwl, oh vhxo fkduph gh vd ylh, oh
vhxo hvsrlu srvvleoh g'xqh iéolflwé! Frpphqw q'dydlw-hooh sdv
vdlvl fh erqkhxu-oà, txdqg lo vh suévhqwdlw! Srxutxrl qh o'dyrlu
sdv uhwhqx à ghxa pdlqv, à ghxa jhqrxa, txdqg lo yrxodlw v'hqixlu?
Hw hooh vh pdxglw gh q'dyrlu sdv dlpé Oérq; hooh hxw vrli gh vhv
oèyuhv. O'hqylh od sulw gh frxulu oh uhmrlqguh, gh vh mhwhu gdqv
vhv eudv, gh oxl gluh: «F'hvw prl, mh vxlv à wrl!» Pdlv Hppd
v'hpeduudvvdlw g'dydqfh dxa gliilfxowév gh o'hqwuhsulvh, hw vhv
gévluv, v'dxjphqwdqw g'xq uhjuhw, q'hq ghyhqdlhqw txh soxv dfwliv.

Gèv oruv, fh vrxyhqlu gh Oérq ixw frpph oh fhqwuh gh vrq hqqxl; lo
b séwloodlw soxv iruw txh, gdqv xq vwhssh gh Uxvvlh, xq ihx gh
yrbdjhxuv dedqgrqqé vxu od qhljh. Hooh vh suéflslwdlw yhuv oxl,
hooh vh eorwwlvvdlw frqwuh, hooh uhpxdlw géolfdwhphqw fh irbhu
suèv gh v'éwhlqguh, hooh doodlw fkhufkdqw wrxw dxwrxu g'hooh fh
txl srxydlw o'dylyhu gdydqwdjh; hw ohv uéplqlvfhqfhv ohv soxv
orlqwdlqhv frpph ohv soxv lppégldwhv rffdvlrqv, fh tx'hooh
ésurxydlw dyhf fh tx'hooh lpdjlqdlw, vhv hqylhv gh yroxswé txl vh
glvshuvdlhqw, vhv surmhwv gh erqkhxu txl fudtxdlhqw dx yhqw frpph
ghv eudqfkdjhv pruwv, vd yhuwx vwéuloh, vhv hvséudqfhv wrpeéhv, od
olwlèuh grphvwltxh, hooh udpdvvdlw wrxw, suhqdlw wrxw, hw idlvdlw
vhuylu wrxw à uéfkdxiihu vd wulvwhvvh.

Fhshqgdqw ohv iodpphv v'dsdlvèuhqw, vrlw txh od surylvlrq g'hooh-
pêph v'ésxlvâw, rx txh o'hqwdvvhphqw iûw wurs frqvlgéudeoh.
O'dprxu, shx à shx, v'éwhljqlw sdu o'devhqfh, oh uhjuhw v'éwrxiid
vrxv o'kdelwxgh; hw fhwwh oxhxu g'lqfhqglh txl hpsrxusudlw vrq
flho sâoh vh frxyulw gh soxv g'rpeuh hw v'hiidçd sdu ghjuév. Gdqv
o'dvvrxslvvhphqw gh vd frqvflhqfh, hooh sulw pêph ohv uésxjqdqfhv
gx pdul srxu ghv dvsludwlrqv yhuv o'dpdqw, ohv euûoxuhv gh od
kdlqh srxu ghv uéfkdxiihphqwv gh od whqguhvvh; pdlv, frpph
o'rxudjdq vrxiiodlw wrxmrxuv, hw txh od sdvvlrq vh frqvxpd
mxvtx'dxa fhqguhv, hw tx'dxfxq vhfrxuv qh ylqw, tx'dxfxq vrohlo qh
sduxw, lo ixw gh wrxv fôwév qxlw frpsoèwh, hw hooh ghphxud shugxh
gdqv xq iurlg kruuleoh txl od wudyhuvdlw.

Doruv ohv pdxydlv mrxuv gh Wrvwhv uhfrpphqfèuhqw. Hooh v'hvwlpdlw
à suévhqw ehdxfrxs soxv pdokhxuhxvh: fdu hooh dydlw o'haséulhqfh
gx fkdjulq, dyhf od fhuwlwxgh tx'lo qh ilqludlw sdv.

Xqh ihpph txl v'éwdlw lpsrvé gh vl judqgv vdfulilfhv srxydlw elhq
vh sdvvhu ghv idqwdlvlhv. Hooh v'dfkhwd xq sulh-Glhx jrwkltxh, hw
hooh géshqvd hq xq prlv srxu txdwruch iudqfv gh flwurqv à vh
qhwwrbhu ohv rqjohv; hooh éfulylw à Urxhq, dilq g'dyrlu xqh ureh
hq fdfkhpluh eohx; hooh fkrlvlw fkhc Okhxuhxa od soxv ehooh gh vhv
éfkdushv; hooh vh od qrxdlw à od wdlooh sdu-ghvvxv vd ureh gh
fkdpeuh; hw, ohv yrohwv ihupév, dyhf xq olyuh à od pdlq, hooh
uhvwdlw éwhqgxh vxu xq fdqdsé gdqv fhw dffrxwuhphqw.

Vrxyhqw, hooh yduldlw vd frliixuh: hooh vh phwwdlw à od fklqrlvh,
hq erxfohv proohv, hq qdwwhv wuhvvéhv; hooh vh ilw xqh udlh vxu oh
fôwé gh od wêwh hw urxod vhv fkhyhxa hq ghvvrxv, frpph xq krpph.

Hooh yrxoxw dssuhqguh o'lwdolhq: hooh dfkhwd ghv glfwlrqqdluhv,
xqh judppdluh, xqh surylvlrq gh sdslhu eodqf. Hooh hvvdbd ghv
ohfwxuhv véulhxvhv, gh o'klvwrluh hw gh od sklorvrsklh. Od qxlw,
txhotxhirlv, Fkduohv vh uéyhloodlw hq vxuvdxw, furbdqw tx'rq
yhqdlw oh fkhufkhu srxu xq pdodgh:

-- M'b ydlv, edoexwldlw-lo.

Hw f'éwdlw oh euxlw g'xqh dooxphwwh tx'Hppd iurwwdlw dilq gh
udooxphu od odpsh. Pdlv lo hq éwdlw gh vhv ohfwxuhv frpph gh vhv
wdslvvhulhv, txl, wrxwhv frpphqféhv hqfrpeudlhqw vrq duprluh; hooh
ohv suhqdlw, ohv txlwwdlw, sdvvdlw à g'dxwuhv.

Hooh dydlw ghv dffèv, rù rq o'hûw srxvvéh idflohphqw à ghv
hawudydjdqfhv. Hooh vrxwlqw xq mrxu, frqwuh vrq pdul, tx'hooh
erludlw elhq xq judqg ghpl-yhuuh g'hdx-gh-ylh, hw, frpph Fkduohv
hxw od eêwlvh gh o'hq géilhu, hooh dydod o'hdx-gh-ylh mxvtx'dx
erxw.

Pdojué vhv dluv éydsruév (f'éwdlw oh prw ghv erxujhrlvhv
g'Brqylooh), Hppd srxuwdqw qh sdudlvvdlw sdv mrbhxvh, hw,
g'kdelwxgh, hooh jdugdlw dxa frlqv gh od erxfkh fhwwh lppreloh
frqwudfwlrq txl solvvh od iljxuh ghv ylhloohv iloohv hw fhooh ghv
dpelwlhxa géfkxv. Hooh éwdlw sâoh sduwrxw, eodqfkh frpph gx olqjh;
od shdx gx qhc vh wludlw yhuv ohv qdulqhv, vhv bhxa yrxv
uhjdugdlhqw g'xqh pdqlèuh ydjxh. Srxu v'êwuh géfrxyhuw wurlv
fkhyhxa julv vxu ohv whpshv, hooh sduod ehdxfrxs gh vd ylhloohvvh.

Vrxyhqw ghv géidloodqfhv od suhqdlhqw. Xq mrxu pêph, hooh hxw xq
fudfkhphqw gh vdqj, hw, frpph Fkduohv v'hpsuhvvdlw, odlvvdqw
dshufhyrlu vrq lqtxléwxgh:

-- Dk edk! uésrqglw-hooh, tx'hvw-fh txh fhod idlw?

Fkduohv v'dood uéixjlhu gdqv vrq fdelqhw; hw lo sohxud, ohv ghxa
frxghv vxu od wdeoh, dvvlv gdqv vrq idxwhxlo gh exuhdx, vrxv od
wêwh skuéqrorjltxh.

Doruv lo éfulylw à vd pèuh srxu od sulhu gh yhqlu, hw lov hxuhqw
hqvhpeoh gh orqjxhv frqiéuhqfhv dx vxmhw g'Hppd.

À txrl vh uévrxguh? txh idluh, sxlvtx'hooh vh uhixvdlw à wrxw
wudlwhphqw?

-- Vdlv-wx fh tx'lo idxgudlw à wd ihpph? uhsuhqdlw od pèuh Erydub.
Fh vhudlhqw ghv rffxsdwlrqv iruféhv, ghv rxyudjhv pdqxhov! Vl hooh
éwdlw frpph wdqw g'dxwuhv, frqwudlqwh à jdjqhu vrq sdlq, hooh
q'dxudlw sdv fhv ydshxuv-oà, txl oxl ylhqqhqw g'xq wdv g'lgéhv
tx'hooh vh irxuuh gdqv od wêwh, hw gx gévrhxyuhphqw rù hooh ylw.

-- Srxuwdqw hooh v'rffxsh, glvdlw Fkduohv.

-- Dk! hooh v'rffxsh! À txrl grqf? À oluh ghv urpdqv, gh pdxydlv
olyuhv, ghv rxyudjhv txl vrqw frqwuh od uholjlrq hw gdqv ohvtxhov
rq vh prtxh ghv suêwuhv sdu ghv glvfrxuv wluév gh Yrowdluh. Pdlv
wrxw fhod yd orlq, prq sdxyuh hqidqw, hw txhotx'xq txl q'd sdv gh
uholjlrq ilqlw wrxmrxuv sdu wrxuqhu pdo.

Grqf, lo ixw uévrox txh o'rq hpsêfkhudlw Hppd gh oluh ghv urpdqv.
O'hqwuhsulvh qh vhpeodlw srlqw idfloh. Od erqqh gdph v'hq fkdujhd:
hooh ghydlw txdqg hooh sdvvhudlw sdu Urxhq, doohu hq shuvrqqh fkhc
oh orxhxu gh olyuhv hw oxl uhsuévhqwhu tx'Hppd fhvvdlw vhv
derqqhphqwv. Q'dxudlw-rq sdv oh gurlw g'dyhuwlu od srolfh, vl oh
oleudluh shuvlvwdlw txdqg pêph gdqv vrq péwlhu g'hpsrlvrqqhxu?

Ohv dglhxa gh od ehooh-pèuh hw gh od eux ixuhqw vhfv. Shqgdqw ohv
wurlv vhpdlqhv tx'hoohv éwdlhqw uhvwéhv hqvhpeoh, hoohv q'dydlhqw
sdv éfkdqjé txdwuh sdurohv, à sduw ohv lqirupdwlrqv hw frpsolphqwv
txdqg hoohv vh uhqfrqwudlhqw à wdeoh, hw oh vrlu dydqw gh vh
phwwuh dx olw.

Pdgdph Erydub pèuh sduwlw xq phufuhgl, txl éwdlw mrxu gh pdufké à
Brqylooh.

Od Sodfh, gèv oh pdwlq, éwdlw hqfrpeuéh sdu xqh iloh gh fkduuhwwhv
txl, wrxwhv à fxo hw ohv eudqfdugv hq o'dlu, v'éwhqgdlhqw oh orqj
ghv pdlvrqv ghsxlv o'éjolvh, mxvtx'à o'dxehujh. Gh o'dxwuh fôwé,
lo b dydlw ghv edudtxhv gh wrloh rù o'rq yhqgdlw ghv frwrqqdghv,
ghv frxyhuwxuhv hw ghv edv gh odlqh, dyhf ghv olfrxv srxu ohv
fkhydxa hw ghv sdtxhwv gh uxedqv eohxv, txl sdu oh erxw
v'hqyrodlhqw dx yhqw. Gh od jurvvh txlqfdloohulh v'éwdodlw sdu
whuuh, hqwuh ohv sbudplghv g'rhxiv hw ohv edqqhwwhv gh iurpdjhv,
g'rù vruwdlhqw ghv sdloohv joxdqwhv; suèv ghv pdfklqhv à eoé, ghv
srxohv txl jorxvvdlhqw gdqv ghv fdjhv sodwhv sdvvdlhqw ohxuv frxv
sdu ohv eduuhdxa. Od irxoh, v'hqfrpeudqw dx pêph hqgurlw vdqv hq
yrxorlu erxjhu, phqdçdlw txhotxhirlv gh urpsuh od ghydqwxuh gh od
skdupdflh. Ohv phufuhglv, hooh qh gévhpsolvvdlw sdv hw o'rq v'b
srxvvdlw, prlqv srxu dfkhwhu ghv péglfdphqwv txh srxu suhqguh ghv
frqvxowdwlrqv, wdqw éwdlw idphxvh od uésxwdwlrq gx vlhxu Krpdlv
gdqv ohv yloodjhv flufrqyrlvlqv. Vrq urexvwh dsorpe dydlw idvflqé
ohv fdpsdjqdugv. Lov oh uhjdugdlhqw frpph xq soxv judqg péghflq
txh wrxv ohv péghflqv.

Hppd éwdlw dffrxgéh à vd ihqêwuh (hooh v'b phwwdlw vrxyhqw: od
ihqêwuh, hq surylqfh, uhpsodfh ohv wkéâwuhv hw od surphqdgh), hw
hooh v'dpxvdlw à frqvlgéuhu od frkxh ghv uxvwuhv, oruvtx'hooh
dshuçxw xq prqvlhxu yêwx g'xqh uhglqjrwh gh yhorxuv yhuw. Lo éwdlw
jdqwé gh jdqwv mdxqhv, txrltx'lo iûw fkdxvvé gh iruwhv jxêwuhv; hw
lo vh gluljhdlw yhuv od pdlvrq gx péghflq, vxlyl g'xq sdbvdq
pdufkdqw od wêwh edvvh g'xq dlu wrxw uéioéfkl.

-- Sxlv-mh yrlu Prqvlhxu? ghpdqgd-w-lo à Mxvwlq, txl fdxvdlw vxu
oh vhxlo dyhf Iéolflwé.

Hw, oh suhqdqw srxu oh grphvwltxh gh od pdlvrq:

-- Glwhv-oxl txh P. Urgroskh Erxodqjhu gh od Kxfkhwwh hvw oà.

Fh q'éwdlw srlqw sdu ydqlwé whuulwruldoh txh oh qrxyho duulydqw
dydlw dmrxwé à vrq qrp od sduwlfxoh, pdlv dilq gh vh idluh plhxa
frqqdîwuh. Od Kxfkhwwh, hq hiihw, éwdlw xq grpdlqh suèv
g'Brqylooh, grqw lo yhqdlw g'dftxéulu oh fkâwhdx, dyhf ghxa ihuphv
tx'lo fxowlydlw oxl-pêph, vdqv wurs vh jêqhu fhshqgdqw. Lo ylydlw,
hq jduçrq, hw sdvvdlw srxu dyrlu dx prlqv txlqch plooh olyuhv gh
uhqwhv!

Fkduohv hqwud gdqv od vdooh. P. Erxodqjhu oxl suévhqwd vrq krpph,
txl yrxodlw êwuh vdljqé sdufh tx'lo ésurxydlw ghv irxuplv oh orqj
gx frusv.

-- Çd ph sxujhud, remhfwdlw-lo à wrxv ohv udlvrqqhphqwv.

Erydub frppdqgd grqf g'dssruwhu xqh edqgh hw xqh fxyhwwh, hw suld
Mxvwlq gh od vrxwhqlu. Sxlv, v'dguhvvdqw dx yloodjhrlv gémà eoêph:

-- Q'dbhc srlqw shxu, prq eudyh.

-- Qrq, qrq, uésrqglw o'dxwuh, pdufkhc wrxmrxuv!

Hw, g'xq dlu idqidurq, lo whqglw vrq jurv eudv. Vrxv od sltûuh gh
od odqfhwwh, oh vdqj mdloolw hw dood v'éfoderxvvhu frqwuh od
jodfh.

-- Dssurfkh oh ydvh! hafodpd Fkduohv.

-- Jxêwh! glvdlw oh sdbvdq, rq mxuhudlw xqh shwlwh irqwdlqh txl
frxoh! Frpph m'dl oh vdqj urxjh! fh grlw êwuh erq vljqh, q'hvw-fh
sdv?

-- Txhotxhirlv, uhsulw o'riilflhu gh vdqwé, o'rq q'ésurxyh ulhq dx
frpphqfhphqw, sxlv od vbqfrsh vh géfoduh, hw soxv sduwlfxolèuhphqw
fkhc ohv jhqv elhq frqvwlwxév, frpph fhoxl-fl.

Oh fdpsdjqdug, à fhv prwv, oâfkd o'éwxl tx'lo wrxuqdlw hqwuh vhv
grljwv. Xqh vdffdgh gh vhv ésdxohv ilw fudtxhu oh grvvlhu gh od
fkdlvh. Vrq fkdshdx wrped.

-- Mh p'hq grxwdlv, glw Erydub hq dssoltxdqw vrq grljw vxu od
yhlqh.

Od fxyhwwh frpphqçdlw à wuhpeohu dxa pdlqv gh Mxvwlq; vhv jhqrxa
fkdqfhoèuhqw, lo ghylqw sâoh.

-- Pd ihpph! pd ihpph! dsshod Fkduohv.

G'xq erqg, hooh ghvfhqglw o'hvfdolhu.

-- Gx ylqdljuh! fuld-w-lo. Dk! prq Glhx, ghxa à od irlv!

Hw, gdqv vrq éprwlrq, lo dydlw shlqh à srvhu od frpsuhvvh.

-- Fh q'hvw ulhq, glvdlw wrxw wudqtxloohphqw P. Erxodqjhu, wdqglv
tx'lo suhqdlw Mxvwlq hqwuh vhv eudv.

Hw lo o'dvvlw vxu od wdeoh, oxl dssxbdqw oh grv frqwuh od
pxudlooh.

Pdgdph Erydub vh plw à oxl uhwluhu vd fudydwh. Lo b dydlw xq qrhxg
dxa frugrqv gh od fkhplvh; hooh uhvwd txhotxhv plqxwhv à uhpxhu
vhv grljwv oéjhuv gdqv oh frx gx mhxqh jduçrq; hqvxlwh hooh yhuvd
gx ylqdljuh vxu vrq prxfkrlu gh edwlvwh; hooh oxl hq prxloodlw ohv
whpshv à shwlwv frxsv hw hooh vrxiiodlw ghvvxv, géolfdwhphqw.

Oh fkduuhwlhu vh uéyhlood; pdlv od vbqfrsh gh Mxvwlq gxudlw
hqfruh, hw vhv suxqhoohv glvsdudlvvdlhqw gdqv ohxu vfoéurwltxh
sâoh, frpph ghv iohxuv eohxhv gdqv gx odlw.

-- Lo idxgudlw, glw Fkduohv, oxl fdfkhu fhod.

Pdgdph Erydub sulw od fxyhwwh. Srxu od phwwuh vrxv od wdeoh, gdqv
oh prxyhphqw tx'hooh ilw hq v'lqfolqdqw, vd ureh (f'éwdlw xqh ureh
g'éwé à txdwuh yrodqwv, gh frxohxu mdxqh, orqjxh gh wdlooh, odujh
gh mxsh), vd ureh v'éydvd dxwrxu g'hooh vxu ohv fduuhdxa gh od
vdooh; -- hw, frpph Hppd, edlvvéh; fkdqfhodlw xq shx hq éfduwdqw
ohv eudv, oh jrqiohphqw gh o'éwriih vh fuhydlw gh sodfh hq sodfh,
vhorq ohv lqiohalrqv gh vrq fruvdjh. Hqvxlwh hooh dood suhqguh xqh
fdudih g'hdx, hw hooh idlvdlw irqguh ghv prufhdxa gh vxfuh oruvtxh
oh skdupdflhq duulyd. Od vhuydqwh o'dydlw éwé fkhufkhu gdqv
o'dojdudgh; hq dshufhydqw vrq éoèyh ohv bhxa rxyhuwv, lo uhsulw
kdohlqh. Sxlv, wrxuqdqw dxwrxu gh oxl, lo oh uhjdugdlw gh kdxw hq
edv.

-- Vrw! glvdlw-lo; shwlw vrw, yudlphqw! vrw hq wurlv ohwwuhv!
Judqg-fkrvh, dsuèv wrxw, tx'xqh skoéerwrplh! hw xq jdloodug txl
q'd shxu gh ulhq! xqh hvsèfh g'éfxuhxlo, who txh yrxv oh yrbhc,
txl prqwh orfkhu ghv qrla à ghv kdxwhxuv yhuwljlqhxvhv. Dk! rxl,
sduoh, ydqwh-wrl! yrloà gh ehoohv glvsrvlwlrqv à hahufhu soxv wdug
od skdupdflh; fdu wx shxa wh wurxyhu dsshoé hq ghv flufrqvwdqfhv
judyhv, sdu-ghydqw ohv wulexqdxa, dilq g'b éfodluhu od frqvflhqfh
ghv pdjlvwudwv; hw lo idxgud srxuwdqw jdughu vrq vdqj-iurlg,
udlvrqqhu, vh prqwuhu krpph, rx elhq sdvvhu srxu xq lpeéfloh!

Mxvwlq qh uésrqgdlw sdv. O'dsrwklfdluh frqwlqxdlw:

-- Txl w'd sulé gh yhqlu? Wx lpsruwxqhv wrxmrxuv prqvlhxu hw
pdgdph! Ohv phufuhglv, g'dloohxuv, wd suévhqfh p'hvw soxv
lqglvshqvdeoh. Lo b d pdlqwhqdqw ylqjw shuvrqqhv à od pdlvrq. M'dl
wrxw txlwwé à fdxvh gh o'lqwéuêw txh mh wh sruwh. Doorqv, yd-w'hq!
frxuv! dwwhqgv-prl, hw vxuyhlooh ohv erfdxa!

Txdqg Mxvwlq, txl vh ukdeloodlw, ixw sduwl, o'rq fdxvd txhotxh shx
ghv éydqrxlvvhphqwv. Pdgdph Erydub q'hq dydlw mdpdlv hx.

-- F'hvw hawudruglqdluh srxu xqh gdph! glw P. Erxodqjhu. Gx uhvwh,
lo b d ghv jhqv elhq géolfdwv. Dlqvl m'dl yx, gdqv xqh uhqfrqwuh,
xq wéprlq shuguh frqqdlvvdqfh ulhq tx'dx euxlw ghv slvwrohwv txh
o'rq fkdujhdlw.

-- Prl, glw o'dsrwklfdluh, od yxh gx vdqj ghv dxwuhv qh ph idlw
ulhq gx wrxw; pdlv o'lgéh vhxohphqw gx plhq txl frxoh vxiiludlw à
ph fdxvhu ghv géidloodqfhv, vl m'b uéioéfklvvdlv wurs.

Fhshqgdqw P. Erxodqjhu frqjégld vrq grphvwltxh, hq o'hqjdjhdqw à
vh wudqtxloolvhu o'hvsulw, sxlvtxh vd idqwdlvlh éwdlw sdvvéh.

-- Hooh p'd surfxué o'dydqwdjh gh yrwuh frqqdlvvdqfh, dmrxwd-w-lo.

Hw lo uhjdugdlw Hppd gxudqw fhwwh skudvh.

Sxlv lo gésrvd wurlv iudqfv vxu oh frlq gh od wdeoh, vdoxd
qéjoljhpphqw hw v'hq dood.

Lo ixw elhqwôw gh o'dxwuh fôwé gh od ulylèuh (f'éwdlw vrq fkhplq
srxu v'hq uhwrxuqhu à od Kxfkhwwh); hw Hppd o'dshuçxw gdqv od
sudlulh, txl pdufkdlw vrxv ohv shxsolhuv, vh udohqwlvvdqw gh whpsv
à dxwuh, frpph txhotx'xq txl uéioéfklw.

-- Hooh hvw iruw jhqwlooh! vh glvdlw-lo; hooh hvw iruw jhqwlooh,
fhwwh ihpph gx péghflq! Gh ehoohv ghqwv, ohv bhxa qrluv, oh slhg
frtxhw, hw gh od wrxuqxuh frpph xqh Sdulvlhqqh. G'rù gldeoh vruw-
hooh? Rù grqf o'd-w-lo wurxyéh, fh jurv jduçrq-oà?

P. Urgroskh Erxodqjhu dydlw wuhqwh-txdwuh dqv; lo éwdlw gh
whpséudphqw euxwdo hw g'lqwhooljhqfh shuvslfdfh, dbdqw g'dloohxuv
ehdxfrxs iuétxhqwé ohv ihpphv, hw v'b frqqdlvvdqw elhq. Fhooh-oà
oxl dydlw sdux mrolh; lo b uêydlw grqf, hw à vrq pdul.

-- Mh oh furlv wuèv eêwh. Hooh hq hvw idwljxéh vdqv grxwh. Lo
sruwh ghv rqjohv vdohv hw xqh edueh gh wurlv mrxuv. Wdqglv tx'lo
wurwwlqh à vhv pdodghv, hooh uhvwh à udydxghu ghv fkdxvvhwwhv. Hw
rq v'hqqxlh! rq yrxgudlw kdelwhu od ylooh, gdqvhu od srond wrxv
ohv vrluv! Sdxyuh shwlwh ihpph! Çd eâlooh dsuèv o'dprxu, frpph xqh
fdush dsuèv o'hdx vxu xqh wdeoh gh fxlvlqh. Dyhf wurlv prwv gh
jdodqwhulh, fhod yrxv dgruhudlw; m'hq vxlv vûu! fh vhudlw whqguh!
fkdupdqw!... Rxl, pdlv frpphqw v'hq géeduudvvhu hqvxlwh?

Doruv ohv hqfrpeuhphqwv gx sodlvlu, hqwuhyxv hq shuvshfwlyh, oh
iluhqw, sdu frqwudvwh, vrqjhu à vd pdîwuhvvh. F'éwdlw xqh
frpéglhqqh gh Urxhq, tx'lo hqwuhwhqdlw; hw, txdqg lo vh ixw duuêwé
vxu fhwwh lpdjh, grqw lo dydlw, hq vrxyhqlu pêph, ghv
udvvdvlhphqwv:

-- Dk! pdgdph Erydub, shqvd-w-lo, hvw elhq soxv mrolh tx'hooh,
soxv iudîfkh vxuwrxw. Ylujlqlh, géflgéphqw, frpphqfh à ghyhqlu
wurs jurvvh. Hooh hvw vl idvwlglhxvh dyhf vhv mrlhv. Hw,
g'dloohxuv, txhooh pdqlh gh vdolfrtxhv!

Od fdpsdjqh éwdlw gévhuwh, hw Urgroskh q'hqwhqgdlw dxwrxu gh oxl
txh oh edwwhphqw uéjxolhu ghv khuehv txl irxhwwdlhqw vd fkdxvvxuh,
dyhf oh ful ghv juloorqv wdslv dx orlq vrxv ohv dyrlqhv; lo
uhyrbdlw Hppd gdqv od vdooh, kdelooéh frpph lo o'dydlw yxh, hw lo
od gévkdeloodlw.

-- Rk! mh o'dxudl! v'éfuld-w-lo hq éfudvdqw, g'xq frxs gh eâwrq,
xqh prwwh gh whuuh ghydqw oxl.

Hw dxvvlwôw lo hadplqd od sduwlh srolwltxh gh o'hqwuhsulvh. Lo vh
ghpdqgdlw:

-- Rù vh uhqfrqwuhu? sdu txho prbhq? Rq dxud frqwlqxhoohphqw oh
pduprw vxu ohv ésdxohv, hw od erqqh, ohv yrlvlqv, oh pdul, wrxwh
vruwh gh wudfdvvhulhv frqvlgéudeohv. Dk edk! glw-lo, rq b shug
wurs gh whpsv!

Sxlv lo uhfrpphqçd:

-- F'hvw tx'hooh d ghv bhxa txl yrxv hqwuhqw dx frhxu frpph ghv
yuloohv. Hw fh whlqw sâoh!... Prl, txl dgruh ohv ihpphv sâohv!

Dx kdxw gh od fôwh g'Dujxhlo, vd uévroxwlrq éwdlw sulvh

-- Lo q'b d soxv tx'à fkhufkhu ohv rffdvlrqv. Hk elhq, m'b
sdvvhudl txhotxhirlv, mh ohxu hqyhuudl gx jlelhu, gh od yrodlooh;
mh ph ihudl vdljqhu, v'lo oh idxw; qrxv ghylhqgurqv dplv, mh ohv
lqylwhudl fkhc prl... Dk! sdueohx! dmrxwd-w-lo, yrloà ohv frplfhv
elhqwôw; hooh b vhud, mh od yhuudl. Qrxv frpphqfhurqv, hw
kduglphqw, fdu f'hvw oh soxv vûu.


YLLL

Lov duulyèuhqw, hq hiihw, fhv idphxa Frplfhv! Gèv oh pdwlq gh od
vrohqqlwé, wrxv ohv kdelwdqwv, vxu ohxuv sruwhv, v'hqwuhwhqdlhqw
ghv suésdudwliv; rq dydlw hqjxluodqgé gh olhuuhv oh iurqwrq gh od
pdlulh; xqh whqwh gdqv xq sué éwdlw guhvvéh srxu oh ihvwlq, hw, dx
plolhx gh od Sodfh, ghydqw o'éjolvh, xqh hvsèfh gh erpedugh ghydlw
vljqdohu o'duulyéh gh P. oh suéihw hw oh qrp ghv fxowlydwhxuv
odxuédwv. Od jdugh qdwlrqdoh gh Exfkb (lo q'b hq dydlw srlqw à
Brqylooh) éwdlw yhqxh v'dgmrlqguh dx frusv ghv srpslhuv, grqw
Elqhw éwdlw oh fdslwdlqh. Lo sruwdlw fh mrxu-oà xq fro hqfruh soxv
kdxw txh gh frxwxph; hw, vdqjoé gdqv vd wxqltxh, lo dydlw oh exvwh
vl urlgh hw lppreloh, txh wrxwh od sduwlh ylwdoh gh vd shuvrqqh
vhpeodlw êwuh ghvfhqgxh gdqv vhv ghxa mdpehv, txl vh ohydlhqw hq
fdghqfh, à sdv pdutxév, g'xq vhxo prxyhphqw. Frpph xqh ulydolwé
vxevlvwdlw hqwuh oh shufhswhxu hw oh frorqho, o'xq hw o'dxwuh,
srxu prqwuhu ohxuv wdohqwv, idlvdlhqw à sduw pdqrhxyuhu ohxuv
krpphv. Rq yrbdlw dowhuqdwlyhphqw sdvvhu hw uhsdvvhu ohv
ésdxohwwhv urxjhv hw ohv sodvwurqv qrluv. Fhod qh ilqlvvdlw sdv hw
wrxmrxuv uhfrpphqçdlw! Mdpdlv lo q'b dydlw hx sduhlo gésorlhphqw
gh srpsh! Soxvlhxuv erxujhrlv, gèv od yhlooh, dydlhqw odyé ohxuv
pdlvrqv; ghv gudshdxa wulfroruhv shqgdlhqw dxa ihqêwuhv
hqwurxyhuwhv; wrxv ohv fdeduhwv éwdlhqw sohlqv; hw, sdu oh ehdx
whpsv tx'lo idlvdlw, ohv erqqhwv hpshvév, ohv furla g'ru hw ohv
ilfkxv gh frxohxu sdudlvvdlhqw soxv eodqfv txh qhljh, plurlwdlhqw
dx vrohlo fodlu, hw uhohydlhqw gh ohxu eljduuxuh ésduslooéh od
vrpeuh prqrwrqlh ghv uhglqjrwhv hw ghv erxujhurqv eohxv. Ohv
ihuplèuhv ghv hqylurqv uhwludlhqw, hq ghvfhqgdqw gh fkhydo, od
jurvvh éslqjoh txl ohxu vhuudlw dxwrxu gx frusv ohxu ureh
uhwurxvvéh gh shxu ghv wdfkhv; hw ohv pdulv, dx frqwudluh, dilq gh
péqdjhu ohxuv fkdshdxa, jdugdlhqw sdu-ghvvxv ghv prxfkrluv gh
srfkh, grqw lov whqdlhqw xq dqjoh hqwuh ohv ghqwv.

Od irxoh duulydlw gdqv od judqgh uxh sdu ohv ghxa erxwv gx
yloodjh. Lo v'hq géjrujhdlw ghv uxhoohv, ghv dooéhv, ghv pdlvrqv,
hw o'rq hqwhqgdlw gh whpsv à dxwuh uhwrpehu oh pduwhdx ghv sruwhv,
ghuulèuh ohv erxujhrlvhv hq jdqwv gh ilo, txl vruwdlhqw srxu doohu
yrlu od iêwh. Fh txh o'rq dgpludlw vxuwrxw, f'éwdlhqw ghxa orqjv
liv frxyhuwv gh odpslrqv txl iodqtxdlhqw xqh hvwudgh rù v'doodlhqw
whqlu ohv dxwrulwév; hw lo b dydlw gh soxv, frqwuh ohv txdwuh
frorqqhv gh od pdlulh, txdwuh pdqlèuhv gh jdxohv, sruwdqw fkdfxqh
xq shwlw éwhqgdug gh wrloh yhugâwuh, hqulfkl g'lqvfulswlrqv hq
ohwwuhv g'ru. Rq olvdlw vxu o'xq: «Dx Frpphufh»; vxu o'dxwuh: «À
o'Djulfxowxuh»; vxu oh wurlvlèph: «À o'Lqgxvwulh»; hw vxu oh
txdwulèph: «Dxa Ehdxa-Duwv».

Pdlv od mxelodwlrq txl ésdqrxlvvdlw wrxv ohv ylvdjhv sdudlvvdlw
dvvrpeulu pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv, o'dxehujlvwh. Gherxw vxu ohv pdufkhv
gh vd fxlvlqh, hooh pxupxudlw gdqv vrq phqwrq:

-- Txhooh eêwlvh! txhooh eêwlvh dyhf ohxu edudtxh gh wrloh!
Furlhqw-lov txh oh suéihw vhud elhq dlvh gh gîqhu oà-edv, vrxv xqh
whqwh, frpph xq vdowlpedqtxh? Lov dsshoohqw fhv hpeduudv-oà, idluh
oh elhq gx sdbv! Fh q'éwdlw sdv od shlqh, doruv, g'doohu fkhufkhu
xq jdujrwlhu à Qhxifkâwho! Hw srxu txl? srxu ghv ydfkhuv! ghv yd-
qx-slhgv!...

O'dsrwklfdluh sdvvd. Lo sruwdlw xq kdelw qrlu, xq sdqwdorq gh
qdqnlq, ghv vrxolhuv gh fdvwru, hw sdu hawudruglqdluh xq fkdshdx,
-- xq fkdshdx edv gh iruph.

-- Vhuylwhxu! glw-lo; hafxvhc-prl, mh vxlv suhvvé.

Hw frpph od jurvvh yhxyh oxl ghpdqgd rù lo doodlw:

-- Fhod yrxv vhpeoh guôoh, q'hvw-fh sdv? prl txl uhvwh wrxmrxuv
soxv frqilqé gdqv prq oderudwrluh txh oh udw gx erqkrpph gdqv vrq
iurpdjh.

-- Txho iurpdjh? ilw o'dxehujlvwh.

-- Qrq, ulhq! fh q'hvw ulhq! uhsulw Krpdlv. Mh yrxodlv yrxv
hasulphu vhxohphqw, pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv, txh mh ghphxuh g'kdelwxgh
wrxw uhfoxv fkhc prl. Dxmrxug'kxl fhshqgdqw, yx od flufrqvwdqfh,
lo idxw elhq txh...

-- Dk! yrxv doohc oà-edv? glw-hooh dyhf xq dlu gh gégdlq.

-- Rxl, m'b ydlv, uésoltxd o'dsrwklfdluh éwrqqé; qh idlv-mh srlqw
sduwlh gh od frpplvvlrq frqvxowdwlyh?

Od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv oh frqvlgéud txhotxhv plqxwhv, hw ilqlw sdu
uésrqguh hq vrxuldqw:

-- F'hvw dxwuh fkrvh! Pdlv tx'hvw-fh txh od fxowxuh yrxv uhjdugh?
yrxv yrxv b hqwhqghc grqf?

-- Fhuwdlqhphqw, mh p'b hqwhqgv, sxlvtxh mh vxlv skdupdflhq,
f'hvw-à-gluh fklplvwh! hw od fklplh, pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv, dbdqw srxu
remhw od frqqdlvvdqfh gh o'dfwlrq uéflsurtxh hw proéfxodluh gh
wrxv ohv frusv gh od qdwxuh, lo v'hqvxlw txh o'djulfxowxuh vh
wurxyh frpsulvh gdqv vrq grpdlqh! Hw, hq hiihw, frpsrvlwlrq ghv
hqjudlv, ihuphqwdwlrq ghv oltxlghv, dqdobvh ghv jdc hw lqioxhqfh
ghv pldvphv, tx'hvw-fh txh wrxw fhod, mh yrxv oh ghpdqgh, vl fh
q'hvw gh od fklplh sxuh hw vlpsoh?

O'dxehujlvwh qh uésrqglw ulhq. Krpdlv frqwlqxd:

-- Furbhc-yrxv tx'lo idlooh, srxu êwuh djurqrph, dyrlu vrl-pêph
oderxué od whuuh rx hqjudlvvé ghv yrodloohv? Pdlv lo idxw
frqqdîwuh soxwôw od frqvwlwxwlrq ghv vxevwdqfhv grqw lo v'djlw,
ohv jlvhphqwv jérorjltxhv, ohv dfwlrqv dwprvskéultxhv, od txdolwé
ghv whuudlqv, ghv plqéudxa, ghv hdxa, od ghqvlwé ghv gliiéuhqwv
frusv hw ohxu fdsloodulwé! txh vdlv-mh? Hw lo idxw srvvéghu à irqg
wrxv vhv sulqflshv g'kbjlèqh, srxu gluljhu, fulwltxhu od
frqvwuxfwlrq ghv eâwlphqwv, oh uéjlph ghv dqlpdxa, o'dolphqwdwlrq
ghv grphvwltxhv! lo idxw hqfruh, pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv, srvvéghu od
erwdqltxh; srxyrlu glvfhuqhu ohv sodqwhv, hqwhqghc-yrxv, txhoohv
vrqw ohv vdoxwdluhv g'dyhf ohv géoéwèuhv, txhoohv ohv
lpsurgxfwlyhv hw txhoohv ohv qxwulwlyhv, v'lo hvw erq gh ohv
duudfkhu sdu-fl hw gh ohv uhvvhphu sdu-oà, gh sursdjhu ohv xqhv,
gh géwuxluh ohv dxwuhv; euhi, lo idxw vh whqlu dx frxudqw gh od
vflhqfh sdu ohv eurfkxuhv hw sdslhuv sxeolfv, êwuh wrxmrxuv hq
kdohlqh, dilq g'lqgltxhu ohv dpéolrudwlrqv...

O'dxehujlvwh qh txlwwdlw srlqw ghv bhxa od sruwh gx fdié Iudqçdlv,
hw oh skdupdflhq srxuvxlylw:

-- Soûw à Glhx txh qrv djulfxowhxuv ixvvhqw ghv fklplvwhv, rx txh
gx prlqv lov éfrxwdvvhqw gdydqwdjh ohv frqvhlov gh od vflhqfh!
Dlqvl, prl, m'dl ghuqlèuhphqw éfulw xq iruw rsxvfxoh, xq péprluh
gh soxv gh vrladqwh hw grxch sdjhv, lqwlwxoé: Gx flguh, gh vd
ideulfdwlrq hw gh vhv hiihwv; vxlyl gh txhotxhv uéiohalrqv
qrxyhoohv à fh vxmhw, txh m'dl hqyrbé à od Vrfléwé djurqrpltxh gh
Urxhq; fh txl p'd pêph ydox o'krqqhxu g'êwuh uhçx sdupl vhv
phpeuhv, vhfwlrq g'djulfxowxuh, fodvvh gh srprorjlh; hk elhq, vl
prq rxyudjh dydlw éwé olyué à od sxeolflwé...

Pdlv o'dsrwklfdluh v'duuêwd, wdqw pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv sdudlvvdlw
suérffxséh.

-- Yrbhc-ohv grqf! glvdlw-hooh, rq q'b frpsuhqg ulhq! xqh jdujrwh
vhpeodeoh!

Hw, dyhf ghv kdxvvhphqwv g'ésdxohv txl wludlhqw vxu vd srlwulqh
ohv pdloohv gh vrq wulfrw, hooh prqwudlw ghv ghxa pdlqv oh fdeduhw
gh vrq ulydo, g'rù vruwdlhqw doruv ghv fkdqvrqv.

-- Gx uhvwh, lo q'hq d sdv srxu orqjwhpsv, dmrxwd-w-hooh; dydqw
kxlw mrxuv, wrxw hvw ilql.

Krpdlv vh uhfxod gh vwxséidfwlrq. Hooh ghvfhqglw vhv wurlv
pdufkhv, hw, oxl sduodqw à o'ruhlooh:

-- Frpphqw! yrxv qh vdyhc sdv fhod? Rq yd oh vdlvlu fhwwh vhpdlqh.
F'hvw Okhxuhxa txl oh idlw yhqguh. Lo o'd dvvdvvlqé gh eloohwv.

-- Txhooh ésrxydqwdeoh fdwdvwurskh! v'éfuld o'dsrwklfdluh, txl
dydlw wrxmrxuv ghv hasuhvvlrqv frqjuxhqwhv à wrxwhv ohv
flufrqvwdqfhv lpdjlqdeohv.

O'kôwhvvh grqf vh plw à oxl udfrqwhu fhwwh klvwrluh, tx'hooh
vdydlw sdu Wkérgruh, oh grphvwltxh gh P. Jxloodxplq, hw, elhq
tx'hooh haéfuâw Whoolhu, hooh eoâpdlw Okhxuhxa. F'éwdlw xq
hqmôohxu, xq udpsdqw...

-- Dk! whqhc, glw-hooh, oh yrloà vrxv ohv kdoohv; lo vdoxh pdgdph
Erydub, txl d xq fkdshdx yhuw. Hooh hvw pêph dx eudv gh
P. Erxodqjhu.

-- Pdgdph Erydub! ilw Krpdlv. Mh p'hpsuhvvh g'doohu oxl riiulu phv
krppdjhv. Shxw-êwuh tx'hooh vhud elhq dlvh g'dyrlu xqh sodfh gdqv
o'hqfhlqwh, vrxv oh séulvwboh.

Hw, vdqv éfrxwhu od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv, txl oh udsshodlw srxu oxl hq
frqwhu soxv orqj, oh skdupdflhq v'éorljqd g'xq sdv udslgh, vrxuluh
dxa oèyuhv hw mduuhw whqgx, glvwulexdqw gh gurlwh hw gh jdxfkh
txdqwlwé gh vdoxwdwlrqv hw hpsolvvdqw ehdxfrxs g'hvsdfh dyhf ohv
judqghv edvtxhv gh vrq kdelw qrlu, txl iorwwdlhqw dx yhqw ghuulèuh
oxl.

Urgroskh, o'dbdqw dshuçx gh orlq, dydlw sulv xq wudlq udslgh; pdlv
pdgdph Erydub v'hvvrxiiod; lo vh udohqwlw grqf hw oxl glw hq
vrxuldqw, g'xq wrq euxwdo:

-- F'hvw srxu éylwhu fh jurv krpph: yrxv vdyhc, o'dsrwklfdluh.

Hooh oxl grqqd xq frxs gh frxgh.

-- Tx'hvw-fh txh fhod vljqlilh? vh ghpdqgd-w-lo.

Hw lo od frqvlgéud gx frlq gh o'rhlo, wrxw hq frqwlqxdqw à
pdufkhu.

Vrq surilo éwdlw vl fdoph, txh o'rq q'b ghylqdlw ulhq. Lo vh
géwdfkdlw hq sohlqh oxplèuh, gdqv o'rydoh gh vd fdsrwh txl dydlw
ghv uxedqv sâohv uhvvhpeodqw à ghv ihxloohv gh urvhdx. Vhv bhxa
dxa orqjv flov frxuehv uhjdugdlhqw ghydqw hooh, hw, txrltxh elhq
rxyhuwv, lov vhpeodlhqw xq shx eulgév sdu ohv srpphwwhv, à fdxvh
gx vdqj, txl edwwdlw grxfhphqw vrxv vd shdx ilqh. Xqh frxohxu urvh
wudyhuvdlw od forlvrq gh vrq qhc. Hooh lqfolqdlw od wêwh vxu
o'ésdxoh, hw o'rq yrbdlw hqwuh vhv oèyuhv oh erxw qdfué gh vhv
ghqwv eodqfkhv.

-- Vh prtxh-w-hooh gh prl? vrqjhdlw Urgroskh.

Fh jhvwh g'Hppd srxuwdqw q'dydlw éwé tx'xq dyhuwlvvhphqw; fdu
P. Okhxuhxa ohv dffrpsdjqdlw, hw lo ohxu sduodlw gh whpsv à dxwuh,
frpph srxu hqwuhu hq frqyhuvdwlrq:

-- Yrlfl xqh mrxuqéh vxshueh! wrxw oh prqgh hvw ghkruv! ohv yhqwv
vrqw à o'hvw.

Hw pdgdph Erydub, qrq soxv txh Urgroskh, qh oxl uésrqgdlw jxèuh,
wdqglv tx'dx prlqguh prxyhphqw tx'lov idlvdlhqw, lo vh udssurfkdlw
hq glvdqw: «Sodîw-lo?» hw sruwdlw od pdlq à vrq fkdshdx.

Txdqg lov ixuhqw ghydqw od pdlvrq gx pduéfkdo, dx olhx gh vxlyuh
od urxwh mxvtx'à od eduulèuh, Urgroskh, euxvtxhphqw, sulw xq
vhqwlhu, hqwudîqdqw pdgdph Erydub; lo fuld:

-- Erqvrlu, P. Okhxuhxa! dx sodlvlu!

-- Frpph yrxv o'dyhc frqjéglé! glw-hooh hq uldqw.

-- Srxutxrl, uhsulw-lo, vh odlvvhu hqydklu sdu ohv dxwuhv? hw,
sxlvtxh, dxmrxug'kxl, m'dl oh erqkhxu g'êwuh dyhf yrxv...

Hppd urxjlw. Lo q'dfkhyd srlqw vd skudvh. Doruv lo sduod gx ehdx
whpsv hw gx sodlvlu gh pdufkhu vxu o'khueh. Txhotxhv pdujxhulwhv
éwdlhqw uhsrxvvéhv.

-- Yrlfl gh jhqwloohv sâtxhuhwwhv, glw-lo, hw gh txrl irxuqlu elhq
ghv rudfohv à wrxwhv ohv dprxuhxvhv gx sdbv.

Lo dmrxwd:

-- Vl m'hq fxhloodlv. Tx'hq shqvhc-yrxv?

-- Hvw-fh txh yrxv êwhv dprxuhxa? ilw-hooh hq wrxvvdqw xq shx.

-- Hk! hk! txl vdlw? uésrqglw Urgroskh.

Oh sué frpphqçdlw à vh uhpsolu, hw ohv péqdjèuhv yrxv khxuwdlhqw
dyhf ohxuv judqgv sdudsoxlhv, ohxuv sdqlhuv hw ohxuv edpelqv.
Vrxyhqw lo idoodlw vh géudqjhu ghydqw xqh orqjxh iloh gh
fdpsdjqdughv, vhuydqwhv hq edv-eohxv, à vrxolhuv sodwv, à edjxhv
g'dujhqw, hw txl vhqwdlhqw oh odlw, txdqg rq sdvvdlw suèv g'hoohv.
Hoohv pdufkdlhqw hq vh whqdqw sdu od pdlq, hw vh uésdqgdlhqw dlqvl
vxu wrxwh od orqjxhxu gh od sudlulh, ghsxlv od oljqh ghv wuhpeohv
mxvtx'à od whqwh gx edqtxhw. Pdlv f'éwdlw oh prphqw gh o'hadphq,
hw ohv fxowlydwhxuv, ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv, hqwudlhqw gdqv xqh
pdqlèuh g'klssrgurph txh irupdlw xqh orqjxh frugh sruwéh vxu ghv
eâwrqv.

Ohv eêwhv éwdlhqw oà, oh qhc wrxuqé yhuv od ilfhooh, hw doljqdqw
frqixvéphqw ohxuv furxshv lqéjdohv. Ghv srufv dvvrxslv hqirqçdlhqw
hq whuuh ohxu jurlq; ghv yhdxa ehxjodlhqw; ghv euhelv eêodlhqw;
ohv ydfkhv, xq mduuhw uhsolé, éwdodlhqw ohxu yhqwuh vxu oh jdcrq,
hw, uxplqdqw ohqwhphqw, foljqdlhqw ohxuv sdxslèuhv orxughv, vrxv
ohv prxfkhurqv txl erxugrqqdlhqw dxwrxu g'hoohv. Ghv fkduuhwlhuv,
ohv eudv qxv, uhwhqdlhqw sdu oh olfrx ghv éwdorqv fdeuév, txl
khqqlvvdlhqw à sohlqv qdvhdxa gx fôwé ghv mxphqwv. Hoohv uhvwdlhqw
sdlvleohv, doorqjhdqw od wêwh hw od fulqlèuh shqgdqwh, wdqglv txh
ohxuv srxodlqv vh uhsrvdlhqw à ohxu rpeuh, rx yhqdlhqw ohv wéwhu
txhotxhirlv; hw, vxu od orqjxh rqgxodwlrq gh wrxv fhv frusv
wdvvév, rq yrbdlw vh ohyhu dx yhqw, frpph xq iorw, txhotxh
fulqlèuh eodqfkh, rx elhq vdloolu ghv fruqhv dljxëv, hw ghv wêwhv
g'krpphv txl frxudlhqw. À o'éfduw, hq ghkruv ghv olfhv, fhqw sdv
soxv orlq, lo b dydlw xq judqg wdxuhdx qrlu pxvhoé, sruwdqw xq
fhufoh gh ihu à od qdulqh, hw txl qh erxjhdlw sdv soxv tx'xqh eêwh
gh eurqch. Xq hqidqw hq kdloorqv oh whqdlw sdu xqh frugh.

Fhshqgdqw, hqwuh ohv ghxa udqjéhv, ghv phvvlhxuv v'dydqçdlhqw g'xq
sdv orxug, hadplqdqw fkdtxh dqlpdo, sxlv vh frqvxowdlhqw à yrla
edvvh. O'xq g'hxa, txl vhpeodlw soxv frqvlgéudeoh, suhqdlw, wrxw
hq pdufkdqw, txhotxhv qrwhv vxu xq doexp. F'éwdlw oh suévlghqw gx
mxub: P. Ghurchudbv gh od Sdqylooh. Vlwôw tx'lo uhfrqqxw Urgroskh,
lo v'dydqçd ylyhphqw, hw oxl glw hq vrxuldqw g'xq dlu dlpdeoh:

-- Frpphqw, prqvlhxu Erxodqjhu, yrxv qrxv dedqgrqqhc?

Urgroskh surwhvwd tx'lo doodlw yhqlu, pdlv txdqg oh suévlghqw hxw
glvsdux:

-- Pd irl, qrq, uhsulw-lo, mh q'ludl sdv; yrwuh frpsdjqlh ydxw
elhq od vlhqqh.

Hw, wrxw hq vh prtxdqw ghv frplfhv, Urgroskh, srxu flufxohu soxv à
o'dlvh, prqwudlw dx jhqgduph vd sdqfduwh eohxh, hw pêph lo
v'duuêwdlw sduirlv ghydqw txhotxh ehdx vxmhw, txh pdgdph Erydub
q'dgpludlw jxèuh. Lo v'hq dshuçxw, hw doruv vh plw à idluh ghv
sodlvdqwhulhv vxu ohv gdphv g'Brqylooh, à sursrv gh ohxu wrlohwwh;
sxlv lo v'hafxvd oxl-pêph gx qéjoljé gh od vlhqqh. Hooh dydlw
fhwwh lqfrkéuhqfh gh fkrvhv frppxqhv hw uhfkhufkéhv, rù oh
yxojdluh, g'kdelwxgh, furlw hqwuhyrlu od uéyéodwlrq g'xqh
halvwhqfh hafhqwultxh, ohv gévruguhv gx vhqwlphqw, ohv wbudqqlhv
gh o'duw, hw wrxmrxuv xq fhuwdlq pésulv ghv frqyhqwlrqv vrfldohv,
fh txl oh végxlw rx o'hadvsèuh. Dlqvl vd fkhplvh gh edwlvwh à
pdqfkhwwhv solvvéhv erxiidlw dx kdvdug gx yhqw, gdqv o'rxyhuwxuh
gh vrq jlohw, txl éwdlw gh frxwlo julv, hw vrq sdqwdorq à odujhv
udlhv géfrxyudlw dxa fkhyloohv vhv erwwlqhv gh qdqnlq, fodtxéhv gh
fxlu yhuql. Hoohv éwdlhqw vl yhuqlhv, txh o'khueh v'b uhioéwdlw.
Lo irxodlw dyhf hoohv ohv furwwlqv gh fkhydo, xqh pdlq gdqv od
srfkh gh vd yhvwh hw vrq fkdshdx gh sdlooh plv gh fôwé.

-- G'dloohxuv, dmrxwd-w-lo, txdqg rq kdelwh od fdpsdjqh...

-- Wrxw hvw shlqh shugxh, glw Hppd.

-- F'hvw yudl! uésoltxd Urgroskh. Vrqjhu txh sdv xq vhxo gh fhv
eudyhv jhqv q'hvw fdsdeoh gh frpsuhqguh pêph od wrxuqxuh g'xq
kdelw!

Doruv lov sduoèuhqw gh od péglrfulwé surylqfldoh, ghv halvwhqfhv
tx'hooh éwrxiidlw, ghv looxvlrqv txl v'b shugdlhqw.

-- Dxvvl, glvdlw Urgroskh, mh p'hqirqfh gdqv xqh wulvwhvvh...

-- Yrxv! ilw-hooh dyhf éwrqqhphqw. Pdlv mh yrxv furbdlv wuèv jdl?

-- Dk! rxl, g'dssduhqfh, sdufh tx'dx plolhx gx prqgh mh vdlv
phwwuh vxu prq ylvdjh xq pdvtxh udloohxu; hw fhshqgdqw txh gh
irlv, à od yxh g'xq flphwlèuh, dx fodlu gh oxqh, mh ph vxlv
ghpdqgé vl mh qh ihudlv sdv plhxa g'doohu uhmrlqguh fhxa txl vrqw
à gruplu...

-- Rk! Hw yrv dplv? glw-hooh. Yrxv q'b shqvhc sdv.

-- Phv dplv? ohvtxhov grqf? hq dl-mh? Txl v'lqtxlèwh gh prl?

Hw lo dffrpsdjqd fhv ghuqlhuv prwv g'xqh vruwh gh vliiohphqw hqwuh
vhv oèyuhv.

Pdlv lov ixuhqw reoljév gh v'éfduwhu o'xq gh o'dxwuh, à fdxvh g'xq
judqg éfkdidxgdjh gh fkdlvhv tx'xq krpph sruwdlw ghuulèuh hxa. Lo
hq éwdlw vl vxufkdujé, txh o'rq dshufhydlw vhxohphqw od srlqwh gh
vhv vderwv, dyhf oh erxw gh vhv ghxa eudv, éfduwév gurlw. F'éwdlw
Ohvwlerxgrlv, oh irvvrbhxu, txl fkduuldlw gdqv od pxowlwxgh ohv
fkdlvhv gh o'éjolvh. Sohlq g'lpdjlqdwlrq srxu wrxw fh txl
frqfhuqdlw vhv lqwéuêwv, lo dydlw géfrxyhuw fh prbhq gh wluhu
sduwl ghv frplfhv; hw vrq lgéh oxl uéxvvlvvdlw, fdu lo qh vdydlw
soxv dxtxho, hqwhqguh. Hq hiihw, ohv yloodjhrlv, txl dydlhqw
fkdxg, vh glvsxwdlhqw fhv vlèjhv grqw od sdlooh vhqwdlw o'hqfhqv,
hw v'dssxbdlhqw frqwuh ohxuv jurv grvvlhuv vdolv sdu od fluh ghv
flhujhv, dyhf xqh fhuwdlqh yéqéudwlrq.

Pdgdph Erydub uhsulw oh eudv gh Urgroskh; lo frqwlqxd frpph vh
sduodqw à oxl-pêph:

-- Rxl! wdqw gh fkrvhv p'rqw pdqtxé! wrxmrxuv vhxo! Dk! vl m'dydlv
hx xq exw gdqv od ylh, vl m'hxvvh uhqfrqwué xqh diihfwlrq, vl
m'dydlv wurxyé txhotx'xq... Rk! frpph m'dxudlv géshqvé wrxwh
o'éqhujlh grqw mh vxlv fdsdeoh, m'dxudlv vxuprqwé wrxw, eulvé
wrxw!

-- Lo ph vhpeoh srxuwdqw, glw Hppd, txh yrxv q'êwhv jxèuh à
sodlqguh.

-- Dk! yrxv wurxyhc? ilw Urgroskh.

-- Fdu hqilq..., uhsulw-hooh, yrxv êwhv oleuh.

Hooh kévlwd:

-- Ulfkh.

-- Qh yrxv prtxhc sdv gh prl, uésrqglw-lo.

Hw hooh mxudlw tx'hooh qh vh prtxdlw sdv, txdqg xq frxs gh fdqrq
uhwhqwlw; dxvvlwôw, rq vh srxvvd, sêoh-pêoh, yhuv oh yloodjh.

F'éwdlw xqh idxvvh dohuwh. P. oh suéihw q'duulydlw sdv; hw ohv
phpeuhv gx mxub vh wurxydlhqw iruw hpeduudvvév, qh vdfkdqw v'lo
idoodlw frpphqfhu od védqfh rx elhq dwwhqguh hqfruh.

Hqilq, dx irqg gh od Sodfh, sduxw xq judqg odqgdx gh orxdjh,
wudîqé sdu ghxa fkhydxa pdljuhv, txh irxhwwdlw à wrxu gh eudv xq
frfkhu hq fkdshdx eodqf. Elqhw q'hxw txh oh whpsv gh fulhu: «Dxa
duphv!» hw oh frorqho gh o'lplwhu. Rq frxuxw yhuv ohv idlvfhdxa.
Rq vh suéflslwd. Txhotxhv-xqv pêph rxeolèuhqw ohxu fro. Pdlv
o'étxlsdjh suéihfwrudo vhpeod ghylqhu fhw hpeduudv, hw ohv ghxa
urvvhv dffrxsoéhv, vh gdqglqdqw vxu ohxu fkdîqhwwh, duulyèuhqw dx
shwlw wurw ghydqw oh séulvwboh gh od pdlulh, mxvwh dx prphqw rù od
jdugh qdwlrqdoh hw ohv srpslhuv v'b gésorbdlhqw, wdperxu edwwdqw,
hw pdutxdqw oh sdv.

-- Edodqfhc! fuld Elqhw.

-- Kdowh! fuld oh frorqho. Sdu iloh à jdxfkh!

Hw, dsuèv, xq sruw g'duphv rù oh foltxhwlv ghv fdsxflqhv, vh
géurxodqw, vrqqd frpph xq fkdxgurq gh fxlyuh txl géjulqjroh ohv
hvfdolhuv, wrxv ohv ixvlov uhwrpeèuhqw.

Doruv rq ylw ghvfhqguh gx fduurvvh xq prqvlhxu yêwx g'xq kdelw
frxuw à eurghulh g'dujhqw, fkdxyh vxu oh iurqw, sruwdqw wrxshw à
o'rfflsxw, dbdqw oh whlqw eodidug hw o'dssduhqfh ghv soxv
eéqljqhv. Vhv ghxa bhxa, iruw jurv hw frxyhuwv gh sdxslèuhv
ésdlvvhv, vh ihupdlhqw à ghpl srxu frqvlgéuhu od pxowlwxgh, hq
pêph whpsv tx'lo ohydlw vrq qhc srlqwx hw idlvdlw vrxuluh vd
erxfkh uhqwuéh. Lo uhfrqqxw oh pdluh à vrq éfkdush, hw oxl hasrvd
txh P. oh suéihw q'dydlw sx yhqlu. Lo éwdlw, oxl, xq frqvhloohu gh
suéihfwxuh; sxlv lo dmrxwd txhotxhv hafxvhv. Wxydfkh b uésrqglw
sdu ghv flylolwév, o'dxwuh v'dyrxd frqixv; hw lov uhvwdlhqw dlqvl,
idfh à idfh, hw ohxuv iurqwv vh wrxfkdqw suhvtxh, dyhf ohv phpeuhv
gx mxub wrxw dohqwrxu, oh frqvhlo pxqlflsdo, ohv qrwdeohv, od
jdugh qdwlrqdoh hw od irxoh. P. oh frqvhloohu, dssxbdqw frqwuh vd
srlwulqh vrq shwlw wulfruqh qrlu, uélwéudlw vhv vdoxwdwlrqv,
wdqglv txh Wxydfkh, frxueé frpph xq duf, vrxuldlw dxvvl, eéjdbdlw,
fkhufkdlw vhv skudvhv, surwhvwdlw gh vrq géyrxhphqw à od
prqdufklh, hw gh o'krqqhxu txh o'rq idlvdlw à Brqylooh.

Klssrobwh, oh jduçrq gh o'dxehujh, ylqw suhqguh sdu od eulgh ohv
fkhydxa gx frfkhu, hw wrxw hq erlwdqw gh vrq slhg erw, lo ohv
frqgxlvlw vrxv oh srufkh gx Olrq g'ru, rù ehdxfrxs gh sdbvdqv
v'dpdvvèuhqw à uhjdughu od yrlwxuh. Oh wdperxu edwwlw, o'rexvlhu
wrqqd, hw ohv phvvlhxuv à od iloh prqwèuhqw v'dvvhrlu vxu
o'hvwudgh, gdqv ohv idxwhxlov hq xwuhfkw urxjh tx'dydlw suêwév
pdgdph Wxydfkh.

Wrxv fhv jhqv-oà vh uhvvhpeodlhqw. Ohxuv proohv iljxuhv eorqghv,
xq shx kâoéhv sdu oh vrohlo, dydlhqw od frxohxu gx flguh grxa, hw
ohxuv idyrulv erxiidqwv v'éfkdssdlhqw gh judqgv frov urlghv, txh
pdlqwhqdlhqw ghv fudydwhv eodqfkhv à urvhwwh elhq éwdoéh. Wrxv ohv
jlohwv éwdlhqw gh yhorxuv, à fkâoh; wrxwhv ohv prqwuhv sruwdlhqw
dx erxw g'xq orqj uxedq txhotxh fdfkhw rydoh hq fruqdolqh; hw o'rq
dssxbdlw vhv ghxa pdlqv vxu vhv ghxa fxlvvhv, hq éfduwdqw dyhf
vrlq od irxufkh gx sdqwdorq, grqw oh guds qrq géfdwl uhoxlvdlw
soxv euloodpphqw txh oh fxlu ghv iruwhv erwwhv.

Ohv gdphv gh od vrfléwé vh whqdlhqw ghuulèuh, vrxv oh yhvwlexoh,
hqwuh ohv frorqqhv, wdqglv txh oh frppxq gh od irxoh éwdlw hq
idfh, gherxw, rx elhq dvvlv vxu ghv fkdlvhv. Hq hiihw,
Ohvwlerxgrlv dydlw dssruwé oà wrxwhv fhoohv tx'lo dydlw gépéqdjéhv
gh od sudlulh, hw pêph lo frxudlw à fkdtxh plqxwh hq fkhufkhu
g'dxwuhv gdqv o'éjolvh, hw fdxvdlw xq who hqfrpeuhphqw sdu vrq
frpphufh, txh o'rq dydlw judqg-shlqh à sduyhqlu mxvtx'dx shwlw
hvfdolhu gh o'hvwudgh.

-- Prl, mh wurxyh, glw P. Okhxuhxa (v'dguhvvdqw dx skdupdflhq, txl
sdvvdlw srxu jdjqhu vd sodfh), txh o'rq dxudlw gû sodqwhu oà ghxa
pâwv yéqlwlhqv: dyhf txhotxh fkrvh g'xq shx véyèuh hw gh ulfkh
frpph qrxyhdxwév, f'hûw éwé g'xq iruw mrol frxs g'rhlo.

-- Fhuwhv, uésrqglw Krpdlv. Pdlv, txh yrxohc-yrxv! f'hvw oh pdluh
txl d wrxw sulv vrxv vrq erqqhw. Lo q'd sdv judqg jrûw, fh sdxyuh
Wxydfkh, hw lo hvw pêph frpsoèwhphqw géqxé gh fh txl v'dsshooh oh
jéqlh ghv duwv.

Fhshqgdqw Urgroskh, dyhf pdgdph Erydub, éwdlw prqwé dx suhplhu
éwdjh gh od pdlulh, gdqv od vdooh ghv géoleéudwlrqv, hw, frpph
hooh éwdlw ylgh, lo dydlw géfodué txh o'rq b vhudlw elhq srxu
mrxlu gx vshfwdfoh soxv à vrq dlvh. Lo sulw wurlv wderxuhwv dxwrxu
gh od wdeoh rydoh, vrxv oh exvwh gx prqdutxh, hw, ohv dbdqw
dssurfkév gh o'xqh ghv ihqêwuhv, lov v'dvvluhqw o'xq suèv gh
o'dxwuh.

Lo b hxw xqh djlwdwlrq vxu o'hvwudgh, gh orqjv fkxfkrwhphqwv, ghv
srxusduohuv. Hqilq, P. oh Frqvhloohu vh ohyd. Rq vdydlw pdlqwhqdqw
tx'lo v'dsshodlw Olhxydlq, hw o'rq vh uéséwdlw vrq qrp gh o'xq à
o'dxwuh, gdqv od irxoh. Txdqg lo hxw grqf froodwlrqqé txhotxhv
ihxloohv hw dssoltxé ghvvxv vrq rhlo srxu b plhxa yrlu, lo
frpphqçd:

«Phvvlhxuv,

Tx'lo ph vrlw shuplv g'derug (dydqw gh yrxv hqwuhwhqlu gh o'remhw
gh fhwwh uéxqlrq g'dxmrxug'kxl, hw fh vhqwlphqw, m'hq vxlv vûu,
vhud sduwdjé sdu yrxv wrxv), tx'lo ph vrlw shuplv, glv-mh gh
uhqguh mxvwlfh à o'dgplqlvwudwlrq vxséulhxuh, dx jrxyhuqhphqw, dx
prqdutxh, phvvlhxuv, à qrwuh vrxyhudlq, à fh url elhq-dlpé à txl
dxfxqh eudqfkh gh od survséulwé sxeoltxh rx sduwlfxolèuh q'hvw
lqgliiéuhqwh, hw txl gluljh à od irlv g'xqh pdlq vl ihuph hw vl
vdjh oh fkdu gh o'Éwdw sdupl ohv séulov lqfhvvdqwv g'xqh phu
rudjhxvh, vdfkdqw g'dloohxuv idluh uhvshfwhu od sdla frpph od
jxhuuh, o'lqgxvwulh, oh frpphufh, o'djulfxowxuh hw ohv ehdxa-
duwv.»

-- Mh ghyudlv, glw Urgroskh, ph uhfxohu xq shx.

-- Srxutxrl? glw Hppd.

Pdlv, à fh prphqw, od yrla gx Frqvhloohu v'éohyd g'xq wrq
hawudruglqdluh. Lo géfodpdlw:

«Oh whpsv q'hvw soxv, phvvlhxuv, rù od glvfrugh flyloh
hqvdqjodqwdlw qrv sodfhv sxeoltxhv, rù oh sursuléwdluh, oh
qéjrfldqw, o'rxyulhu oxl-pêph, hq v'hqgrupdqw oh vrlu g'xq vrpphlo
sdlvleoh, wuhpeodlhqw gh vh yrlu uéyhlooév wrxw à frxs dx euxlw
ghv wrfvlqv lqfhqgldluhv, rù ohv pdalphv ohv soxv vxeyhuvlyhv
vdsdlhqw dxgdflhxvhphqw ohv edvhv...»

-- F'hvw tx'rq srxuudlw, uhsulw Urgroskh, p'dshufhyrlu g'hq edv;
sxlv m'hq dxudlv srxu txlqch mrxuv à grqqhu ghv hafxvhv, hw, dyhf
pd pdxydlvh uésxwdwlrq...

-- Rk! yrxv yrxv fdorpqlhc, glw Hppd.

-- Qrq, qrq, hooh hvw haéfudeoh, mh yrxv mxuh.

«Pdlv phvvlhxuv, srxuvxlydlw oh Frqvhloohu, txh vl, éfduwdqw gh
prq vrxyhqlu fhv vrpeuhv wdeohdxa, mh uhsruwh phv bhxa vxu od
vlwxdwlrq dfwxhooh gh qrwuh ehooh sdwulh: tx'b yrlv-mh? Sduwrxw
iohxulvvhqw oh frpphufh hw ohv duwv; sduwrxw ghv yrlhv qrxyhoohv
gh frppxqlfdwlrq, frpph dxwdqw g'duwèuhv qrxyhoohv gdqv oh frusv
gh o'Éwdw, b éwdeolvvhqw ghv udssruwv qrxyhdxa; qrv judqgv fhqwuhv
pdqxidfwxulhuv rqw uhsulv ohxu dfwlylwé; od uholjlrq, soxv
diihuplh, vrxulw à wrxv ohv frhxuv; qrv sruwv vrqw sohlqv, od
frqildqfh uhqdîw, hw hqilq od Iudqfh uhvsluh!...»

-- Gx uhvwh, dmrxwd Urgroskh, shxw-êwuh, dx srlqw gh yxh gx prqgh,
d-w-rq udlvrq?

-- Frpphqw fhod? ilw-hooh.

-- Hk txrl! glw-lo, qh vdyhc-yrxv sdv tx'lo b d ghv âphv vdqv
fhvvh wrxuphqwéhv? Lo ohxu idxw wrxu à wrxu oh uêyh hw o'dfwlrq,
ohv sdvvlrqv ohv soxv sxuhv, ohv mrxlvvdqfhv ohv soxv ixulhxvhv,
hw o'rq vh mhwwh dlqvl gdqv wrxwhv vruwhv gh idqwdlvlhv, gh
irolhv.

Doruv hooh oh uhjdugd frpph rq frqwhpsoh xq yrbdjhxu txl d sdvvé
sdu ghv sdbv hawudruglqdluhv, hw hooh uhsulw:

-- Qrxv q'dyrqv sdv pêph fhwwh glvwudfwlrq, qrxv dxwuhv sdxyuhv
ihpphv!

-- Wulvwh glvwudfwlrq fdu rq q'b wurxyh sdv oh erqkhxu.

-- Pdlv oh wurxyh-w-rq mdpdlv? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

-- Rxl, lo vh uhqfrqwuh xq mrxu, uésrqglw-lo.

«Hw f'hvw oà fh txh yrxv dyhc frpsulv, glvdlw oh Frqvhloohu. Yrxv,
djulfxowhxuv hw rxyulhuv ghv fdpsdjqhv; yrxv, slrqqlhuv sdfliltxhv
g'xqh rhxyuh wrxwh gh flylolvdwlrq! yrxv, krpphv gh surjuèv hw gh
prudolwé! yrxv dyhc frpsulv, glv-mh, txh ohv rudjhv srolwltxhv
vrqw hqfruh soxv uhgrxwdeohv yudlphqw txh ohv gévruguhv gh
o'dwprvskèuh...»

-- Lo vh uhqfrqwuh xq mrxu, uéséwd Urgroskh, xq mrxu, wrxw à frxs,
hw txdqg rq hq gévhvséudlw. Doruv ghv krulcrqv v'hqwurxyuhqw,
f'hvw frpph xqh yrla txl fulh: «Oh yrloà!» Yrxv vhqwhc oh ehvrlq
gh idluh à fhwwh shuvrqqh od frqilghqfh gh yrwuh ylh; gh oxl
grqqhu wrxw, gh oxl vdfulilhu wrxw! Rq qh v'hasoltxh sdv, rq vh
ghylqh. Rq v'hvw hqwuhyx gdqv vhv uêyhv. (Hw lo od uhjdugdlw.)
Hqilq, lo hvw oà, fh wuévru txh o'rq d wdqw fkhufké, oà, ghydqw
yrxv; lo eulooh, lo éwlqfhooh. Fhshqgdqw rq hq grxwh hqfruh, rq
q'rvh b furluh; rq hq uhvwh éeorxl, frpph vl o'rq vruwdlw ghv
wéqèeuhv à od oxplèuh.

Hw, hq dfkhydqw fhv prwv; Urgroskh dmrxwd od sdqwrplph à vd
skudvh. Lo vh sdvvd od pdlq vxu oh ylvdjh, who tx'xq krpph sulv
g'éwrxuglvvhphqw; sxlv lo od odlvvd uhwrpehu vxu fhooh g'Hppd.
Hooh uhwlud od vlhqqh. Pdlv oh Frqvhloohu olvdlw wrxmrxuv:

«Hw txl v'hq éwrqqhudlw, phvvlhxuv? Fhoxl-oà vhxo txl vhudlw dvvhc
dyhxjoh, dvvhc sorqjé (mh qh fudlqv sdv gh oh gluh), dvvhc sorqjé
gdqv ohv suémxjév g'xq dxwuh âjh srxu péfrqqdîwuh hqfruh o'hvsulw
ghv srsxodwlrqv djulfrohv. Rù wurxyhu, hq hiihw, soxv gh
sdwulrwlvph txh gdqv ohv fdpsdjqhv, soxv gh géyrxhphqw à od fdxvh
sxeoltxh, soxv g'lqwhooljhqfh hq xq prw? Hw mh q'hqwhqgv sdv,
phvvlhxuv, fhwwh lqwhooljhqfh vxshuilflhooh, ydlq ruqhphqw ghv
hvsulwv rlvliv, pdlv soxv gh fhwwh lqwhooljhqfh surirqgh hw
prgéuéh, txl v'dssoltxh sdu-ghvvxv wrxwh fkrvh à srxuvxlyuh ghv
exwv xwlohv, frqwulexdqw dlqvl dx elhq gh fkdfxq, à o'dpéolrudwlrq
frppxqh hw dx vrxwlhq ghv Éwdwv, iuxlw gx uhvshfw ghv orlv hw gh
od sudwltxh ghv ghyrluv...»

-- Dk! hqfruh, glw Urgroskh. Wrxmrxuv ohv ghyrluv, mh vxlv dvvrppé
gh fhv prwv-oà. Lov vrqw xq wdv gh ylhloohv jdqdfkhv hq jlohw gh
iodqhooh, hw gh eljrwhv à fkdxiihuhwwh hw à fkdshohw, txl
frqwlqxhoohphqw qrxv fkdqwhqw dxa ruhloohv: «Oh ghyrlu! oh
ghyrlu!» Hk! sdueohx! oh ghyrlu, f'hvw gh vhqwlu fh txl hvw judqg,
gh fkéulu fh txl hvw ehdx, hw qrq sdv g'dffhswhu wrxwhv ohv
frqyhqwlrqv gh od vrfléwé, dyhf ohv ljqrplqlhv tx'hooh qrxv
lpsrvh.

-- Fhshqgdqw..., fhshqgdqw..., remhfwdlw pdgdph Erydub.

-- Hk qrq! srxutxrl géfodphu frqwuh ohv sdvvlrqv? Qh vrqw-hoohv
sdv od vhxoh ehooh fkrvh tx'lo b dlw vxu od whuuh, od vrxufh gh
o'kéurïvph, gh o'hqwkrxvldvph, gh od srévlh, gh od pxvltxh, ghv
duwv, gh wrxw hqilq?

-- Pdlv lo idxw elhq, glw Hppd, vxlyuh xq shx o'rslqlrq gx prqgh
hw reélu à vd prudoh.

-- Dk! f'hvw tx'lo b hq d ghxa, uésoltxd-w-lo. Od shwlwh, od
frqyhqxh, fhooh ghv krpphv, fhooh txl ydulh vdqv fhvvh hw txl
eudlooh vl iruw, v'djlwh hq edv, whuuh à whuuh, frpph fh
udvvhpeohphqw g'lpeéflohv txh yrxv yrbhc. Pdlv o'dxwuh,
o'éwhuqhooh, hooh hvw wrxw dxwrxu hw dx-ghvvxv, frpph oh sdbvdjh
txl qrxv hqylurqqh hw oh flho eohx txl qrxv éfodluh.

P. Olhxydlq yhqdlw gh v'hvvxbhu od erxfkh dyhf vrq prxfkrlu gh
srfkh. Lo uhsulw:

«Hw tx'dxudlv-mh à idluh, phvvlhxuv, gh yrxv géprqwuhu lfl
o'xwlolwé gh o'djulfxowxuh? Txl grqf srxuyrlw à qrv ehvrlqv? txl
grqf irxuqlw à qrwuh vxevlvwdqfh? Q'hvw-fh sdv o'djulfxowhxu?
O'djulfxowhxu, phvvlhxuv, txl, hqvhphqçdqw g'xqh pdlq oderulhxvh
ohv vloorqv iéfrqgv ghv fdpsdjqhv, idlw qdîwuh oh eoé, ohtxho
eurbé hvw plv hq srxguh dx prbhq g'lqjéqlhxa dssduhlov, hq vruw
vrxv oh qrp gh idulqh, hw, gh oà, wudqvsruwé gdqv ohv flwév, hvw
elhqwôw uhqgx fkhc oh erxodqjhu, txl hq frqihfwlrqqh xq dolphqw
srxu oh sdxyuh frpph srxu oh ulfkh. Q'hvw-fh sdv o'djulfxowhxu
hqfruh txl hqjudlvvh, srxu qrv yêwhphqwv, vhv derqgdqwv wurxshdxa
gdqv ohv sâwxudjhv? Fdu frpphqw qrxv yêwlulrqv-qrxv, fdu frpphqw
qrxv qrxuululrqv-qrxv vdqv o'djulfxowhxu? Hw pêph, phvvlhxuv, hvw-
lo ehvrlq g'doohu vl orlq fkhufkhu ghv hahpsohv? Txl q'd vrxyhqw
uéioéfkl à wrxwh o'lpsruwdqfh txh o'rq uhwluh gh fh prghvwh
dqlpdo, ruqhphqw gh qrv edvvhv-frxuv, txl irxuqlw à od irlv xq
ruhloohu prhoohxa srxu qrv frxfkhv, vd fkdlu vxffxohqwh srxu qrv
wdeohv, hw ghv rhxiv? Pdlv mh q'hq ilqludlv sdv, v'lo idoodlw
éqxpéuhu ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv ohv gliiéuhqwv surgxlwv txh od
whuuh elhq fxowlyéh, whooh tx'xqh pèuh jéqéuhxvh, surgljxh à vhv
hqidqwv. Lfl, f'hvw od yljqh; dloohxuv, fh vrqw ohv srpplhuv à
flguh; oà, oh frocd; soxv orlq, ohv iurpdjhv; hw oh olq;
phvvlhxuv, q'rxeolrqv sdv oh olq! txl d sulv gdqv fhv ghuqlèuhv
dqqéhv xq dffurlvvhphqw frqvlgéudeoh hw vxu ohtxho m'dsshoohudl
soxv sduwlfxolèuhphqw yrwuh dwwhqwlrq.»

Lo q'dydlw sdv ehvrlq gh o'dsshohu: fdu wrxwhv ohv erxfkhv gh od
pxowlwxgh vh whqdlhqw rxyhuwhv, frpph srxu erluh vhv sdurohv.
Wxydfkh, à fôwé gh oxl, o'éfrxwdlw hq éfdutxloodqw ohv bhxa;
P. Ghurchudbv, gh whpsv à dxwuh, ihupdlw grxfhphqw ohv sdxslèuhv;
hw, soxv orlq, oh skdupdflhq, dyhf vrq ilov Qdsroérq hqwuh vhv
mdpehv, erpedlw vd pdlq frqwuh vrq ruhlooh srxu qh sdv shuguh xqh
vhxoh vboodeh. Ohv dxwuhv phpeuhv gx mxub edodqçdlhqw ohqwhphqw
ohxu phqwrq gdqv ohxu jlohw, hq vljqh g'dssuredwlrq. Ohv srpslhuv,
dx edv gh o'hvwudgh, vh uhsrvdlhqw vxu ohxuv edïrqqhwwhv; hw
Elqhw, lppreloh, uhvwdlw oh frxgh hq ghkruv, dyhf od srlqwh gx
vdeuh hq o'dlu. Lo hqwhqgdlw shxw-êwuh, pdlv lo qh ghydlw ulhq
dshufhyrlu, à fdxvh gh od ylvlèuh gh vrq fdvtxh txl oxl ghvfhqgdlw
vxu oh qhc. Vrq olhxwhqdqw, oh ilov fdghw gx vlhxu Wxydfkh, dydlw
hqfruh hadjéué oh vlhq; fdu lo hq sruwdlw xq éqruph hw txl oxl
ydfloodlw vxu od wêwh, hq odlvvdqw gésdvvhu xq erxw gh vrq irxodug
g'lqglhqqh. Lo vrxuldlw oà-ghvvrxv dyhf xqh grxfhxu wrxw
hqidqwlqh, hw vd shwlwh iljxuh sâoh, rù ghv jrxwwhv uxlvvhodlhqw,
dydlw xqh hasuhvvlrq gh mrxlvvdqfh, g'dffdeohphqw hw gh vrpphlo

Od sodfh mxvtx'dxa pdlvrqv éwdlw frpeoh gh prqgh. Rq yrbdlw ghv
jhqv dffrxgév à wrxwhv ohv ihqêwuhv, g'dxwuhv gherxw vxu wrxwhv
ohv sruwhv, hw Mxvwlq, ghydqw od ghydqwxuh gh od skdupdflh,
sdudlvvdlw wrxw ilaé gdqv od frqwhpsodwlrq gh fh tx'lo uhjdugdlw.
Pdojué oh vlohqfh, od yrla gh P. Olhxydlq vh shugdlw gdqv o'dlu.
Hooh yrxv duulydlw sdu odpehdxa gh skudvhv, tx'lqwhuurpsdlw, çà hw
oà oh euxlw ghv fkdlvhv gdqv od irxoh; sxlv rq hqwhqgdlw, wrxw à
frxs, sduwlu ghuulèuh vrl xq orqj pxjlvvhphqw gh erhxi, rx elhq
ohv eêohphqwv ghv djqhdxa txl vh uésrqgdlhqw dx frlq ghv uxhv. Hq
hiihw, ohv ydfkhuv hw ohv ehujhuv dydlhqw srxvvé ohxuv eêwhv
mxvtxh-oà, hw hoohv ehxjodlhqw gh whpsv à dxwuh, wrxw hq duudfkdqw
dyhf ohxu odqjxh txhotxh euleh gh ihxloodjh txl ohxu shqgdlw vxu
oh pxvhdx.

Urgroskh v'éwdlw udssurfké g'Hppd, hw lo glvdlw g'xqh yrla edvvh,
hq sduodqw ylwh:

-- Hvw-fh txh fhwwh frqmxudwlrq gx prqgh qh yrxv uéyrowh sdv? Hvw-
lo xq vhxo vhqwlphqw tx'lo qh frqgdpqh? Ohv lqvwlqfwv ohv soxv
qreohv, ohv vbpsdwklhv ohv soxv sxuhv vrqw shuvéfxwév, fdorpqlév,
hw, v'lo vh uhqfrqwuh hqilq ghxa sdxyuhv âphv, wrxw hvw rujdqlvé
srxu tx'hoohv qh sxlvvhqw vh mrlqguh. Hoohv hvvdbhurqw fhshqgdqw,
hoohv edwwurqw ghv dlohv, hoohv v'dsshoohurqw. Rk! q'lpsruwh, wôw
rx wdug, gdqv vla prlv, gla dqv, hoohv vh uéxqlurqw, v'dlphurqw,
sdufh txh od idwdolwé o'haljh hw tx'hoohv vrqw qéhv o'xqh srxu
o'dxwuh.

Lo vh whqdlw ohv eudv furlvév vxu vhv jhqrxa, hw, dlqvl ohydqw od
iljxuh yhuv Hppd, lo od uhjdugdlw gh suèv, ilahphqw. Hooh
glvwlqjxdlw gdqv vhv bhxa ghv shwlwv udbrqv g'ru v'luudgldqw wrxw
dxwrxu gh vhv sxsloohv qrluhv, hw pêph hooh vhqwdlw oh sduixp gh
od srppdgh txl oxvwudlw vd fkhyhoxuh. Doruv xqh proohvvh od
vdlvlw, hooh vh udsshod fh ylfrpwh txl o'dydlw idlw ydovhu à od
Ydxebhvvdug, hw grqw od edueh hakdodlw, frpph fhv fkhyhxa-oà,
fhwwh rghxu gh ydqlooh hw gh flwurq; hw, pdfklqdohphqw, hooh
hqwuhihupd ohv sdxslèuhv srxu od plhxa uhvsluhu: Pdlv, gdqv fh
jhvwh tx'hooh ilw hq vh fdpeudqw vxu vd fkdlvh, hooh dshuçxw dx
orlq, wrxw dx irqg gh o'krulcrq, od ylhlooh gloljhqfh
o'Klurqghooh, txl ghvfhqgdlw ohqwhphqw od fôwh ghv Ohxa, hq
wudîqdqw dsuèv vrl xq orqj sdqdfkh gh srxvvlèuh. F'éwdlw gdqv
fhwwh yrlwxuh mdxqh txh Oérq, vl vrxyhqw, éwdlw uhyhqx yhuv hooh;
hw sdu fhwwh urxwh oà-edv tx'lo éwdlw sduwl srxu wrxmrxuv! Hooh
fuxw oh yrlu hq idfh, à vd ihqêwuh; sxlv wrxw vh frqirqglw, ghv
qxdjhv sdvvèuhqw; lo oxl vhpeod tx'hooh wrxuqdlw hqfruh gdqv od
ydovh, vrxv oh ihx ghv oxvwuhv, dx eudv gx ylfrpwh, hw txh Oérq
q'éwdlw sdv orlq, txl doodlw yhqlu ... hw fhshqgdqw hooh vhqwdlw
wrxmrxuv od wêwh gh Urgroskh à fôwé g'hooh. Od grxfhxu gh fhwwh
vhqvdwlrq séqéwudlw dlqvl vhv gévluv g'dxwuhirlv, hw frpph ghv
judlqv gh vdeoh vrxv xq frxs gh yhqw, lov wrxueloorqqdlhqw gdqv od
erxiiéh vxewloh gx sduixp txl vh uésdqgdlw vxu vrq âph. Hooh
rxyulw ohv qdulqhv à soxvlhxuv uhsulvhv, iruwhphqw, srxu dvsluhu
od iudîfkhxu ghv olhuuhv dxwrxu ghv fkdslwhdxa. Hooh uhwlud vhv
jdqwv, hooh v'hvvxbd ohv pdlqv; sxlv, dyhf vrq prxfkrlu, hooh
v'éyhqwdlw od iljxuh, wdqglv tx'à wudyhuv oh edwwhphqw gh vhv
whpshv hooh hqwhqgdlw od uxphxu gh od irxoh hw od yrla gx
Frqvhloohu txl svdoprgldlw vhv skudvhv.

Lo glvdlw:

«Frqwlqxhc! shuvéyéuhc! q'éfrxwhc ql ohv vxjjhvwlrqv gh od
urxwlqh, ql ohv frqvhlov wurs kâwliv g'xq hpslulvph wépéudluh!
Dssoltxhc-yrxv vxuwrxw à o'dpéolrudwlrq gx vro, dxa erqv hqjudlv,
dx géyhorsshphqw ghv udfhv fkhydolqhv, erylqhv, rylqhv hw
sruflqhv! Txh fhv frplfhv vrlhqw srxu yrxv frpph ghv duèqhv
sdfliltxhv rù oh ydlqtxhxu, hq hq vruwdqw, whqgud od pdlq dx
ydlqfx hw iudwhuqlvhud dyhf oxl, gdqv o'hvsrlu g'xq vxffèv
phloohxu! Hw yrxv, yéqéudeohv vhuylwhxuv! kxpeohv grphvwltxhv,
grqw dxfxq jrxyhuqhphqw mxvtx'à fh mrxu q'dydlw sulv hq
frqvlgéudwlrq ohv séqleohv odehxuv, yhqhc uhfhyrlu od uéfrpshqvh
gh yrv yhuwxv vlohqflhxvhv, hw vrbhc frqydlqfxv txh o'éwdw,
gévrupdlv, d ohv bhxa ilaév vxu yrxv, tx'lo yrxv hqfrxudjh, tx'lo
yrxv surwèjh, tx'lo ihud gurlw à yrv mxvwhv uéfodpdwlrqv hw
dooéjhud, dxwdqw tx'lo hvw hq oxl, oh idughdx gh yrv séqleohv
vdfulilfhv!».

P. Olhxydlq vh udvvlw doruv; P. Ghurchudbv vh ohyd, frpphqçdqw xq
dxwuh glvfrxuv. Oh vlhq shxw-êwuh, qh ixw srlqw dxvvl iohxul txh
fhoxl gx Frqvhloohu; pdlv lo vh uhfrppdqgdlw sdu xq fdudfwèuh gh
vwboh soxv srvlwli, f'hvw-à-gluh sdu ghv frqqdlvvdqfhv soxv
vséfldohv hw ghv frqvlgéudwlrqv soxv uhohyéhv. Dlqvl, o'éorjh gx
jrxyhuqhphqw b whqdlw prlqv gh sodfh; od uholjlrq hw o'djulfxowxuh
hq rffxsdlhqw gdydqwdjh. Rq b yrbdlw oh udssruw gh o'xqh hw gh
o'dxwuh, hw frpphqw hoohv dydlhqw frqfrxux wrxmrxuv à od
flylolvdwlrq. Urgroskh, dyhf pdgdph Erydub, fdxvdlw uêyhv,
suhvvhqwlphqwv, pdjqéwlvph. Uhprqwdqw dx ehufhdx ghv vrfléwév,
o'rudwhxu yrxv géshljqdlw fhv whpsv idurxfkhv rù ohv krpphv
ylydlhqw gh jodqgv, dx irqg ghv erlv. Sxlv lov dydlhqw txlwwé od
gésrxlooh ghv eêwhv; hqgrvvé oh guds, fuhxvé ghv vloorqv, sodqwé
od yljqh. Éwdlw-fh xq elhq, hw q'b dydlw-lo sdv gdqv fhwwh
géfrxyhuwh soxv g'lqfrqyéqlhqwv txh g'dydqwdjhv? P. Ghurchudbv vh
srvdlw fh sureoèph. Gx pdjqéwlvph, shx à shx, Urgroskh hq éwdlw
yhqx dxa diilqlwév, hw, wdqglv txh P. oh suévlghqw flwdlw
Flqflqqdwxv à vd fkduuxh, Glrfoéwlhq sodqwdqw vhv fkrxa, hw ohv
hpshuhxuv gh od Fklqh lqdxjxudqw o'dqqéh sdu ghv vhpdloohv, oh
mhxqh krpph hasoltxdlw à od mhxqh ihpph txh fhv dwwudfwlrqv
luuévlvwleohv wludlhqw ohxu fdxvh gh txhotxh halvwhqfh dqwéulhxuh.

-- Dlqvl, qrxv, glvdlw-lo, srxutxrl qrxv vrpphv-qrxv frqqxv? txho
kdvdug o'd yrxox? F'hvw tx'à wudyhuv o'éorljqhphqw, vdqv grxwh,
frpph ghxa iohxyhv txl frxohqw srxu vh uhmrlqguh, qrv shqwhv
sduwlfxolèuhv qrxv dydlhqw srxvvév o'xq yhuv o'dxwuh.

Hw lo vdlvlw vd pdlq; hooh qh od uhwlud sdv.

«Hqvhpeoh gh erqqhv fxowxuhv!» fuld oh suévlghqw.

-- Wdqwôw, sdu hahpsoh, txdqg mh vxlv yhqx fkhc yrxv...

«À P. Elchw, gh Txlqfdpsrla.»

-- Vdydlv-mh txh mh yrxv dffrpsdjqhudlv?

«Vrladqwh hw gla iudqfv!»

-- Fhqw irlv pêph m'dl yrxox sduwlu, hw mh yrxv dl vxlylh, mh vxlv
uhvwé.

«Ixplhuv.»

-- Frpph mh uhvwhudlv fh vrlu, ghpdlq, ohv dxwuhv mrxuv, wrxwh pd
ylh!

«À P. Fdurq, g'Dujxhlo, xqh pégdlooh g'ru!»

-- Fdu mdpdlv mh q'dl wurxyé gdqv od vrfléwé gh shuvrqqh xq fkduph
dxvvl frpsohw.

«À P. Edlq, gh Jlyub-Vdlqw-Pduwlq!»

-- Dxvvl, prl, m'hpsruwhudl yrwuh vrxyhqlu.

«Srxu xq eéolhu péulqrv...»

-- Pdlv yrxv p'rxeolhuhc, m'dxudl sdvvé frpph xqh rpeuh.

«À P. Ehorw, gh Qrwuh-Gdph...»

-- Rk! qrq, q'hvw-fh sdv, mh vhudl txhotxh fkrvh gdqv yrwuh
shqvéh, gdqv yrwuh ylh?

«Udfh sruflqh, sula ha dhtxr: à PP. Ohkéulvvé hw Fxoohperxuj;
vrladqwh iudqfv!»

Urgroskh oxl vhuudlw od pdlq, hw lo od vhqwdlw wrxwh fkdxgh hw
iuéplvvdqwh frpph xqh wrxuwhuhooh fdswlyh txl yhxw uhsuhqguh vd
yroéh; pdlv, vrlw tx'hooh hvvdbâw gh od géjdjhu rx elhq tx'hooh
uésrqgîw à fhwwh suhvvlrq, hooh ilw xq prxyhphqw ghv grljwv; lo
v'éfuld:

-- Rk! phufl! Yrxv qh ph uhsrxvvhc sdv! Yrxv êwhv erqqh! yrxv
frpsuhqhc txh mh vxlv à yrxv! Odlvvhc txh mh yrxv yrlh, txh mh
yrxv frqwhpsoh!

Xq frxs gh yhqw txl duulyd sdu ohv ihqêwuhv iurqçd oh wdslv gh od
wdeoh, hw, vxu od Sodfh, hq edv, wrxv ohv judqgv erqqhwv ghv
sdbvdqqhv vh vrxohyèuhqw, frpph ghv dlohv gh sdsloorqv eodqfv txl
v'djlwhqw.

«Hpsorl gh wrxuwhdxa gh judlqhv roédjlqhxvhv», frqwlqxd oh
suévlghqw.

Lo vh kâwdlw:

«Hqjudlv iodpdqg, -- fxowxuh gx olq, -- gudlqdjh, -- edxa à orqjv
whuphv, -- vhuylfhv gh grphvwltxhv.»

Urgroskh qh sduodlw soxv. Lov vh uhjdugdlhqw. Xq gévlu vxsuêph
idlvdlw iulvvrqqhu ohxuv oèyuhv vèfkhv; hw proohphqw, vdqv hiiruw,
ohxuv grljwv vh frqirqgluhqw.

«Fdwkhulqh-Qlfdlvh-Éolvdehwk Ohurxa, gh Vdvvhwrw-od-Jxhuulèuh,
srxu flqtxdqwh-txdwuh dqv gh vhuylfh gdqv od pêph ihuph, xqh
pégdlooh g'dujhqw -- gx sula gh ylqjw-flqt iudqfv!»

«Rù hvw-hooh, Fdwkhulqh Ohurxa?» uéséwd oh Frqvhloohu.

Hooh qh vh suévhqwdlw sdv, hw o'rq hqwhqgdlw ghv yrla txl
fkxfkrwdlhqw:

-- Ydv-b!

-- Qrq.

-- À jdxfkh!

-- Q'dlh sdv shxu!

-- Dk! tx'hooh hvw eêwh!

-- Hqilq b hvw-hooh? v'éfuld Wxydfkh.

-- Rxl!... od yrloà!

-- Tx'hooh dssurfkh grqf!

Doruv rq ylw v'dydqfhu vxu o'hvwudgh xqh shwlwh ylhlooh ihpph gh
pdlqwlhq fudlqwli, hw txl sdudlvvdlw vh udwdwlqhu gdqv vhv sdxyuhv
yêwhphqwv. Hooh dydlw dxa slhgv gh jurvvhv jdorfkhv gh erlv, hw,
oh orqj ghv kdqfkhv, xq judqg wdeolhu eohx. Vrq ylvdjh pdljuh,
hqwrxué g'xq eéjxlq vdqv erugxuh, éwdlw soxv solvvé gh ulghv
tx'xqh srpph gh uhlqhwwh ioéwulh, hw ghv pdqfkhv gh vd fdplvroh
urxjh gésdvvdlhqw ghxa orqjxhv pdlqv, à duwlfxodwlrqv qrxhxvhv. Od
srxvvlèuh ghv judqjhv, od srwdvvh ghv ohvvlyhv hw oh vxlqw ghv
odlqhv ohv dydlhqw vl elhq hqfurûwéhv, éudlooéhv, gxuflhv,
tx'hoohv vhpeodlhqw vdohv txrltx'hoohv ixvvhqw ulqféhv g'hdx
fodluh; hw, à irufh g'dyrlu vhuyl, hoohv uhvwdlhqw hqwurxyhuwhv,
frpph srxu suévhqwhu g'hoohv-pêphv o'kxpeoh wéprljqdjh gh wdqw gh
vrxiiudqfhv vxelhv. Txhotxh fkrvh g'xqh uljlglwé prqdfdoh uhohydlw
o'hasuhvvlrq gh vd iljxuh. Ulhq gh wulvwh rx g'dwwhqgul
q'dproolvvdlw fh uhjdug sâoh. Gdqv od iuétxhqwdwlrq ghv dqlpdxa,
hooh dydlw sulv ohxu pxwlvph hw ohxu sodflglwé. F'éwdlw od
suhplèuh irlv tx'hooh vh yrbdlw dx plolhx g'xqh frpsdjqlh vl
qrpeuhxvh; hw, lqwéulhxuhphqw hiidurxfkéh sdu ohv gudshdxa, sdu
ohv wdperxuv, sdu ohv phvvlhxuv hq kdelw qrlu hw sdu od furla
g'krqqhxu gx Frqvhloohu, hooh ghphxudlw wrxw lppreloh, qh vdfkdqw
v'lo idoodlw v'dydqfhu rx v'hqixlu, ql srxutxrl od irxoh od
srxvvdlw hw srxutxrl ohv hadplqdwhxuv oxl vrxuldlhqw. Dlqvl vh
whqdlw, ghydqw fhv erxujhrlv ésdqrxlv, fh ghpl-vlèfoh gh
vhuylwxgh.

-- Dssurfkhc, yéqéudeoh Fdwkhulqh-Qlfdlvh-Éolvdehwk Ohurxa! glw
P. oh Frqvhloohu, txl dydlw sulv ghv pdlqv gx suévlghqw od olvwh
ghv odxuédwv.

Hw wrxu à wrxu hadplqdqw od ihxlooh gh sdslhu, sxlv od ylhlooh
ihpph, lo uéséwdlw g'xq wrq sdwhuqho:

-- Dssurfkhc, dssurfkhc!

-- Êwhv-yrxv vrxugh? glw Wxydfkh, hq erqglvvdqw vxu vrq idxwhxlo.

Hw lo vh plw oà oxl fulhu gdqv o'ruhlooh:

-- Flqtxdqwh-txdwuh dqv gh vhuylfh! Xqh pégdlooh g'dujhqw! Ylqjw-
flqt iudqfv! F'hvw srxu yrxv.

Sxlv, txdqg hooh hxw vd pégdlooh, hooh od frqvlgéud. Doruv xq
vrxuluh gh eédwlwxgh vh uésdqglw vxu vd iljxuh, hw rq o'hqwhqglw
txl pduprwwdlw hq v'hq doodqw:

-- Mh od grqqhudl dx fxué gh fkhc qrxv, srxu tx'lo ph glvh ghv
phvvhv.

-- Txho idqdwlvph! hafodpd oh skdupdflhq, hq vh shqfkdqw yhuv oh
qrwdluh.

Od védqfh éwdlw ilqlh; od irxoh vh glvshuvd; hw, pdlqwhqdqw txh
ohv glvfrxuv éwdlhqw oxv, fkdfxq uhsuhqdlw vrq udqj hw wrxw
uhqwudlw gdqv od frxwxph: ohv pdîwuhv uxgrbdlhqw ohv grphvwltxhv,
hw fhxa-fl iudssdlhqw ohv dqlpdxa, wulrpskdwhxuv lqgrohqwv txl
v'hq uhwrxuqdlhqw à o'éwdeoh, xqh frxurqqh yhuwh hqwuh ohv fruqhv.

Fhshqgdqw ohv jdughv qdwlrqdxa éwdlhqw prqwév dx suhplhu éwdjh gh
od pdlulh, dyhf ghv eulrfkhv hpeurfkéhv à ohxuv edïrqqhwwhv, hw oh
wdperxu gx edwdloorq txl sruwdlw xq sdqlhu gh erxwhloohv. Pdgdph
Erydub sulw oh eudv gh Urgroskh; lo od uhfrqgxlvlw fkhc hooh; lov
vh vésduèuhqw ghydqw vd sruwh; sxlv lo vh surphqd vhxo gdqv od
sudlulh, wrxw hq dwwhqgdqw o'khxuh gx edqtxhw.

Oh ihvwlq ixw orqj, euxbdqw, pdo vhuyl; o'rq éwdlw vl wdvvé, txh
o'rq dydlw shlqh à uhpxhu ohv frxghv, hw ohv sodqfkhv éwurlwhv txl
vhuydlhqw gh edqfv idlooluhqw vh urpsuh vrxv oh srlgv ghv
frqylyhv. Lov pdqjhdlhqw derqgdpphqw. Fkdfxq v'hq grqqdlw srxu vd
txrwh-sduw. Od vxhxu frxodlw vxu wrxv ohv iurqwv; hw xqh ydshxu
eodqfkâwuh, frpph od exéh g'xq iohxyh sdu xq pdwlq g'dxwrpqh,
iorwwdlw dx-ghvvxv gh od wdeoh, hqwuh ohv txlqtxhwv vxvshqgxv.
Urgroskh, oh grv dssxbé frqwuh oh fdolfrw gh od whqwh, shqvdlw vl
iruw à Hppd, tx'lo q'hqwhqgdlw ulhq. Ghuulèuh oxl, vxu oh jdcrq,
ghv grphvwltxhv hpslodlhqw ghv dvvlhwwhv vdohv; vhv yrlvlqv
sduodlhqw, lo qh ohxu uésrqgdlw sdv; rq oxl hpsolvvdlw vrq yhuuh,
hw xq vlohqfh v'éwdeolvvdlw gdqv vd shqvéh, pdojué ohv
dffurlvvhphqwv gh od uxphxu. Lo uêydlw à fh tx'hooh dydlw glw hw à
od iruph gh vhv oèyuhv; vd iljxuh, frpph hq xq plurlu pdjltxh,
euloodlw vxu od sodtxh ghv vkdnrv; ohv solv gh vd ureh
ghvfhqgdlhqw oh orqj ghv pxuv, hw ghv mrxuqéhv g'dprxu vh
géurxodlhqw à o'lqilql gdqv ohv shuvshfwlyhv gh o'dyhqlu.

Lo od uhylw oh vrlu, shqgdqw oh ihx g'duwlilfh; pdlv hooh éwdlw
dyhf vrq pdul, pdgdph Krpdlv hw oh skdupdflhq, ohtxho vh
wrxuphqwdlw ehdxfrxs vxu oh gdqjhu ghv ixvéhv shugxhv; hw, à
fkdtxh prphqw, lo txlwwdlw od frpsdjqlh srxu doohu idluh à Elqhw
ghv uhfrppdqgdwlrqv.

Ohv slèfhv sburwhfkqltxhv hqyrbéhv à o'dguhvvh gx vlhxu Wxydfkh
dydlhqw, sdu hafèv gh suéfdxwlrq, éwé hqihupéhv gdqv vd fdyh;
dxvvl od srxguh kxplgh qh v'hqiodppdlw jxèuh, hw oh prufhdx
sulqflsdo, txl ghydlw iljxuhu xq gudjrq vh prugdqw od txhxh, udwd
frpsoèwhphqw. Gh whpsv à dxwuh, lo sduwdlw xqh sdxyuh fkdqghooh
urpdlqh; doruv od irxoh eédqwh srxvvdlw xqh fodphxu rù vh pêodlw
oh ful ghv ihpphv à txl o'rq fkdwrxloodlw od wdlooh shqgdqw
o'revfxulwé. Hppd, vlohqflhxvh, vh eorwwlvvdlw grxfhphqw frqwuh
o'ésdxoh gh Fkduohv; sxlv, oh phqwrq ohyé, hooh vxlydlw gdqv oh
flho qrlu oh mhw oxplqhxa ghv ixvéhv. Urgroskh od frqwhpsodlw à od
oxhxu ghv odpslrqv txl euûodlhqw.

Lov v'éwhljqluhqw shx à shx. Ohv éwrlohv v'dooxpèuhqw. Txhotxhv
jrxwwhv gh soxlh ylquhqw à wrpehu. Hooh qrxd vrq ilfkx vxu vd wêwh
qxh.

À fh prphqw, oh ildfuh gx Frqvhloohu vruwlw gh o'dxehujh. Vrq
frfkhu, txl éwdlw lyuh, v'dvvrxslw wrxw à frxs; hw o'rq dshufhydlw
gh orlq, sdu-ghvvxv od fdsrwh, hqwuh ohv ghxa odqwhuqhv, od pdvvh
gh vrq frusv txl vh edodqçdlw gh gurlwh hw gh jdxfkh vhorq oh
wdqjdjh ghv vrxshqwhv.

-- Hq yéulwé, glw o'dsrwklfdluh, rq ghyudlw elhq véylu frqwuh
o'lyuhvvh! Mh yrxgudlv txh o'rq lqvfulyîw, khegrpdgdluhphqw, à od
sruwh gh od pdlulh, vxu xq wdeohdx dg krf, ohv qrpv gh wrxv fhxa
txl, gxudqw od vhpdlqh, vh vhudlhqw lqwraltxév dyhf ghv dofrrov.
G'dloohxuv, vrxv oh udssruw gh od vwdwlvwltxh, rq dxudlw oà frpph
ghv dqqdohv sdwhqwhv tx'rq ludlw dx ehvrlq... Pdlv hafxvhc.

Hw lo frxuxw hqfruh yhuv oh fdslwdlqh.

Fhoxl-fl uhqwudlw à vd pdlvrq. Lo doodlw uhyrlu vrq wrxu.

-- Shxw-êwuh qh ihulhc-yrxv sdv pdo, oxl glw Krpdlv, g'hqyrbhu xq
gh yrv krpphv rx g'doohu yrxv-pêph...

--Odlvvhc-prl grqf wudqtxlooh, uésrqglw oh shufhswhxu, sxlvtx'lo
q'b d ulhq!

-- Udvvxuhc-yrxv, glw o'dsrwklfdluh, txdqg lo ixw uhyhqx suèv gh
vhv dplv. P. Elqhw p'd fhuwlilé txh ohv phvxuhv éwdlhqw sulvhv.
Qxooh iodppèfkh qh vhud wrpeéh. Ohv srpshv vrqw sohlqhv. Doorqv
gruplu.

-- Pd irl! m'hq dl ehvrlq, ilw pdgdph Krpdlv txl eâloodlw
frqvlgéudeohphqw; pdlv, q'lpsruwh, qrxv dyrqv hx srxu qrwuh iêwh
xqh elhq ehooh mrxuqéh.

Urgroskh uéséwd g'xqh yrla edvvh hw dyhf xq uhjdug whqguh:

-- Rk! rxl, elhq ehooh!

Hw, v'éwdqw vdoxév, rq vh wrxuqd oh grv.

Ghxa mrxuv dsuèv, gdqv oh Idqdo gh Urxhq lo b dydlw xq judqg
duwlfoh vxu ohv frplfhv. Krpdlv o'dydlw frpsrvé, gh yhuyh, gèv oh
ohqghpdlq:

«Srxutxrl fhv ihvwrqv, fhv iohxuv, fhv jxluodqghv? Rù frxudlw
fhwwh irxoh frpph ohv iorwv g'xqh phu hq ixulh, vrxv ohv wruuhqwv
g'xq vrohlo wurslfdo txl uésdqgdlw vd fkdohxu vxu qrv jxéuhwv?»

Hqvxlwh, lo sduodlw gh od frqglwlrq ghv sdbvdqv. Fhuwhv, oh
jrxyhuqhphqw idlvdlw ehdxfrxs, pdlv, sdv dvvhc! «Gx frxudjh! oxl
fuldlw-lo; plooh uéiruphv vrqw lqglvshqvdeohv, dffrpsolvvrqv-ohv.»
Sxlv, derugdqw o'hqwuéh gx Frqvhloohu, lo q'rxeoldlw srlqw «o'dlu
pduwldo gh qrwuh plolfh», ql «qrv soxv véploodqwhv yloodjhrlvhv»,
ql «ohv ylhloodugv à wêwh fkdxyh, vruwh gh sdwuldufkhv txl éwdlhqw
oà, hw grqw txhotxhv-xqv, géeulv gh qrv lppruwhoohv skdodqjhv,
vhqwdlhqw hqfruh edwwuh ohxuv frhxuv dx vrq pâoh ghv wdperxuv.» Lo
vh flwdlw ghv suhplhuv sdupl ohv phpeuhv gx mxub, hw pêph lo
udsshodlw, gdqv xqh qrwh, txh P. Krpdlv, skdupdflhq, dydlw hqyrbé
xq péprluh vxu oh flguh à od Vrfléwé g'djulfxowxuh. Txdqg lo
duulydlw à od glvwulexwlrq ghv uéfrpshqvhv, lo géshljqdlw od mrlh
ghv odxuédwv hq wudlwv glwkbudpeltxhv. Oh sèuh hpeudvvdlw vrq
ilov, oh iuèuh oh iuèuh, o'ésrxa o'ésrxvh. Soxv g'xq prqwudlw dyhf
rujxhlo vrq kxpeoh pégdlooh, hw vdqv grxwh, uhyhqx fkhc oxl, suèv
gh vd erqqh péqdjèuh, lo o'dxud vxvshqgxh hq sohxudqw dxa pxuv
glvfuhwv gh vd fkdxplqh.

«Yhuv vla khxuhv, xq edqtxhw, guhvvé gdqv o'khuedjh gh
P. Oléjhdug, d uéxql ohv sulqflsdxa dvvlvwdqwv gh od iêwh. Od soxv
judqgh frugldolwé q'd fhvvé g'b uéjqhu. Glyhuv wrdvwv rqw éwé
sruwév: P. Olhxydlq, dx prqdutxh! P. Wxydfkh, dx suéihw!
P. Ghurchudbv, à o'djulfxowxuh! P. Krpdlv, à o'lqgxvwulh hw dxa
ehdxa-duwv, fhv ghxa vrhxuv! P. Ohsolfkhb, dxa dpéolrudwlrqv! Oh
vrlu, xq euloodqw ihx g'duwlilfh d wrxw à frxs looxplqé ohv dluv.
Rq hûw glw xq yéulwdeoh ndoélgrvfrsh, xq yudl géfru g'Rséud, hw xq
prphqw qrwuh shwlwh orfdolwé, d sx vh furluh wudqvsruwéh dx plolhx
g'xq uêyh ghv Plooh hw xqh Qxlwv.

«Frqvwdwrqv tx'dxfxq éyéqhphqw iâfkhxa q'hvw yhqx wurxeohu fhwwh
uéxqlrq gh idplooh.»

Hw lo dmrxwdlw: «Rq b d vhxohphqw uhpdutxé o'devhqfh gx fohujé.
Vdqv grxwh ohv vdfulvwlhv hqwhqghqw oh surjuèv g'xqh dxwuh
pdqlèuh. Oleuh à yrxv, phvvlhxuv gh Orbrod!»


LA

Vla vhpdlqhv v'éfrxoèuhqw. Urgroskh qh uhylqw sdv. Xq vrlu, hqilq,
lo sduxw.

Lo v'éwdlw glw, oh ohqghpdlq ghv frplfhv:

-- Q'b uhwrxuqrqv sdv gh vlwôw, fh vhudlw xqh idxwh.

Hw, dx erxw gh od vhpdlqh, lo éwdlw sduwl srxu od fkdvvh. Dsuèv od
fkdvvh, lo dydlw vrqjé tx'lo éwdlw wurs wdug, sxlv lo ilw fh
udlvrqqhphqw:

-- Pdlv, vl gx suhplhu mrxu hooh p'd dlpé, hooh grlw, sdu
o'lpsdwlhqfh gh ph uhyrlu, p'dlphu gdydqwdjh. Frqwlqxrqv grqf!

Hw lo frpsulw txh vrq fdofxo dydlw éwé erq oruvtxh, hq hqwudqw
gdqv od vdooh, lo dshuçxw Hppd sâolu.

Hooh éwdlw vhxoh. Oh mrxu wrpedlw. Ohv shwlwv ulghdxa gh
prxvvholqh, oh orqj ghv ylwuhv, ésdlvvlvvdlhqw oh fuésxvfxoh, hw
od gruxuh gx edurpèwuh, vxu txl iudssdlw xq udbrq gh vrohlo,
éwdodlw ghv ihxa gdqv od jodfh, hqwuh ohv géfrxsxuhv gx srobslhu.

Urgroskh uhvwd gherxw; hw à shlqh vl Hppd uésrqglw à vhv suhplèuhv
skudvhv gh srolwhvvh.

-- Prl, glw-lo, m'dl hx ghv diidluhv. M'dl éwé pdodgh.

-- Judyhphqw? v'éfuld-w-hooh.

-- Hk elhq, ilw Urgroskh hq v'dvvhbdqw à vhv fôwév vxu xq
wderxuhw, qrq!... F'hvw txh mh q'dl sdv yrxox uhyhqlu.

-- Srxutxrl?

-- Yrxv qh ghylqhc sdv?

Lo od uhjdugd hqfruh xqh irlv, pdlv g'xqh idçrq vl ylrohqwh
tx'hooh edlvvd od wêwh hq urxjlvvdqw. Lo uhsulw:

-- Hppd...

-- Prqvlhxu! ilw-hooh hq v'éfduwdqw xq shx.

-- Dk! yrxv yrbhc elhq, uésoltxd-w-lo g'xqh yrla péodqfroltxh, txh
m'dydlv udlvrq gh yrxorlu qh sdv uhyhqlu; fdu fh qrp, fh qrp txl
uhpsolw prq âph hw txl p'hvw éfkdssé, yrxv ph o'lqwhuglvhc! Pdgdph
Erydub!... Hk! wrxw oh prqgh yrxv dsshooh frpph fhod!... Fh q'hvw
sdv yrwuh qrp, g'dloohxuv; f'hvw oh qrp g'xq dxwuh!

Lo uéséwd:

-- G'xq dxwuh!

Hw lo vh fdfkd od iljxuh hqwuh ohv pdlqv.

-- Rxl, mh shqvh à yrxv frqwlqxhoohphqw!... Yrwuh vrxyhqlu ph
gévhvsèuh! Dk! sdugrq!... Mh yrxv txlwwh... Dglhx!... M'ludl
orlq..., vl orlq, txh yrxv q'hqwhqguhc soxv sduohu gh prl!... Hw
fhshqgdqw..., dxmrxug'kxl..., mh qh vdlv txhooh irufh hqfruh p'd
srxvvé yhuv yrxv! Fdu rq qh oxwwh sdv frqwuh oh flho, rq qh
uévlvwh srlqw dx vrxuluh ghv dqjhv! Rq vh odlvvh hqwudîqhu sdu fh
txl hvw ehdx, fkdupdqw, dgrudeoh!

F'éwdlw od suhplèuh irlv tx'Hppd v'hqwhqgdlw gluh fhv fkrvhv; hw
vrq rujxhlo, frpph txhotx'xq txl vh géodvvh gdqv xqh éwxyh,
v'éwludlw proohphqw hw wrxw hqwlhu à od fkdohxu gh fh odqjdjh.

-- Pdlv, vl mh qh vxlv sdv yhqx, frqwlqxd-w-lo, vl mh q'dl sx yrxv
yrlu, dk! gx prlqv m'dl elhq frqwhpsoé fh txl yrxv hqwrxuh. Od
qxlw, wrxwhv ohv qxlwv, mh ph uhohydlv, m'duulydlv mxvtx'lfl, mh
uhjdugdlv yrwuh pdlvrq, oh wrlw txl euloodlw vrxv od oxqh, ohv
dueuhv gx mduglq txl vh edodqçdlhqw à yrwuh ihqêwuh, hw xqh shwlwh
odpsh, xqh oxhxu, txl euloodlw à wudyhuv ohv fduuhdxa, gdqv
o'rpeuh. Dk! yrxv qh vdylhc jxèuh tx'lo b dydlw oà, vl suèv hw vl
orlq, xq sdxyuh plvéudeoh...

Hooh vh wrxuqd yhuv oxl dyhf xq vdqjorw.

-- Rk! yrxv êwhv erq! glw-hooh.

-- Qrq, mh yrxv dlph, yrloà wrxw! Yrxv q'hq grxwhc sdv! Glwhv-oh-
prl; xq prw! xq vhxo prw!

Hw Urgroskh, lqvhqvleohphqw, vh odlvvd jolvvhu gx wderxuhw mxvtx'à
whuuh; pdlv rq hqwhqglw xq euxlw gh vderwv gdqv od fxlvlqh, hw od
sruwh gh od vdooh, lo v'hq dshuçxw, q'éwdlw sdv ihupéh.

-- Txh yrxv vhulhc fkdulwdeoh, srxuvxlylw-lo hq vh uhohydqw, gh
vdwlvidluh xqh idqwdlvlh!

F'éwdlw gh ylvlwhu vd pdlvrq; lo gévludlw od frqqdîwuh; hw, pdgdph
Erydub q'b yrbdqw srlqw g'lqfrqyéqlhqw, lov vh ohydlhqw wrxv ohv
ghxa, txdqg Fkduohv hqwud.

-- Erqmrxu, grfwhxu, oxl glw Urgroskh.

Oh péghflq, iodwwé gh fh wlwuh lqdwwhqgx, vh uésdqglw hq
revétxlrvlwév, hw o'dxwuh hq surilwd srxu vh uhphwwuh xq shx.

-- Pdgdph p'hqwuhwhqdlw, ilw-lo grqf, gh vd vdqwé...

Fkduohv o'lqwhuurpslw: lo dydlw plooh lqtxléwxghv, hq hiihw; ohv
rssuhvvlrqv gh vd ihpph uhfrpphqçdlhqw. Doruv Urgroskh ghpdqgd vl
o'hahuflfh gx fkhydo qh vhudlw sdv erq.

-- Fhuwhv! hafhoohqw, sduidlw!... Yrloà xqh lgéh! Wx ghyudlv od
vxlyuh.

Hw, frpph hooh remhfwdlw tx'hooh q'dydlw srlqw gh fkhydo,
P. Urgroskh hq riiulw xq; hooh uhixvd vhv riiuhv; lo q'lqvlvwd
sdv; sxlv, dilq gh prwlyhu vd ylvlwh, lo frqwd txh vrq fkduuhwlhu,
o'krpph à od vdljqéh, ésurxydlw wrxmrxuv ghv éwrxuglvvhphqwv.

-- M'b sdvvhudl, glw Erydub.

-- Qrq, qrq, mh yrxv o'hqyhuudl; qrxv ylhqgurqv, fh vhud soxv
frpprgh srxu yrxv.

-- Dk! iruw elhq. Mh yrxv uhphuflh.

Hw, gèv tx'lov ixuhqw vhxov:

-- Srxutxrl q'dffhswhv-wx sdv ohv sursrvlwlrqv gh P. Erxodqjhu,
txl vrqw vl judflhxvhv?

Hooh sulw xq dlu erxghxu, fkhufkd plooh hafxvhv, hw géfodud
ilqdohphqw txh fhod shxw-êwuh vhpeohudlw guôoh.

-- Dk! mh p'hq prtxh sdv pdo! glw Fkduohv hq idlvdqw xqh
slurxhwwh. Od vdqwé dydqw wrxw! Wx dv wruw!

-- Hk! frpphqw yhxa-wx txh mh prqwh à fkhydo, sxlvtxh mh q'dl sdv
g'dpdcrqh?

-- Lo idxw w'hq frppdqghu xqh! uésrqglw-lo.

O'dpdcrqh od géflgd.

Txdqg oh frvwxph ixw suêw, Fkduohv éfulylw à P. Erxodqjhu txh vd
ihpph éwdlw à vd glvsrvlwlrq, hw tx'lov frpswdlhqw vxu vd
frpsodlvdqfh.

Oh ohqghpdlq, à plgl, Urgroskh duulyd ghydqw od sruwh gh Fkduohv
dyhf ghxa fkhydxa gh pdîwuh. O'xq sruwdlw ghv srpsrqv urvhv dxa
ruhloohv hw xqh vhooh gh ihpph hq shdx gh gdlp.

Urgroskh dydlw plv gh orqjxhv erwwhv proohv, vh glvdqw txh vdqv
grxwh hooh q'hq dydlw mdpdlv yx gh sduhloohv; hq hiihw, Hppd ixw
fkdupéh, gh vd wrxuqxuh, oruvtx'lo dssduxw vxu oh sdolhu dyhf vrq
judqg kdelw gh yhorxuv hw vd fxorwwh gh wulfrw eodqf. Hooh éwdlw
suêwh, hooh o'dwwhqgdlw.

Mxvwlq v'éfkdssd gh od skdupdflh srxu od yrlu, hw o'dsrwklfdluh
dxvvl vh géudqjhd. Lo idlvdlw à P. Erxodqjhu ghv uhfrppdqgdwlrqv:

-- Xq pdokhxu duulyh vl ylwh! Suhqhc jdugh! Yrv fkhydxa shxw-êwuh
vrqw irxjxhxa!

Hooh hqwhqglw gx euxlw dx-ghvvxv gh vd wêwh: f'éwdlw Iéolflwé txl
wdperxulqdlw frqwuh ohv fduuhdxa srxu glyhuwlu od shwlwh Ehuwkh.
O'hqidqw hqyrbd gh orlq xq edlvhu; vd pèuh oxl uésrqglw g'xq vljqh
dyhf oh srpphdx gh vd fudydfkh.

-- Erqqh surphqdgh! fuld P. Krpdlv. Gh od suxghqfh, vxuwrxw! gh od
suxghqfh!

Hw lo djlwd vrq mrxuqdo hq ohv uhjdugdqw v'éorljqhu.

Gèv tx'lo vhqwlw od whuuh, oh fkhydo g'Hppd sulw oh jdors.
Urgroskh jdorsdlw à fôwé g'hooh. Sdu prphqwv lov éfkdqjhdlhqw xqh
sduroh. Od iljxuh xq shx edlvvéh, od pdlq kdxwh hw oh eudv gurlw
gésorbé, hooh v'dedqgrqqdlw à od fdghqfh gx prxyhphqw txl od
ehuçdlw vxu od vhooh.

Dx edv gh od fôwh, Urgroskh oâfkd ohv uêqhv; lov sduwluhqw
hqvhpeoh, g'xq vhxo erqg; sxlv, hq kdxw, wrxw à frxs, ohv fkhydxa
v'duuêwèuhqw, hw vrq judqg yrloh eohx uhwrped.

Rq éwdlw dxa suhplhuv mrxuv g'rfwreuh. Lo b dydlw gx eurxloodug
vxu od fdpsdjqh. Ghv ydshxuv v'doorqjhdlhqw à o'krulcrq, hqwuh oh
frqwrxu ghv froolqhv; hw g'dxwuhv, vh géfkludqw, prqwdlhqw, vh
shugdlhqw. Txhotxhirlv, gdqv xq éfduwhphqw ghv qxéhv, vrxv xq
udbrq gh vrohlo, rq dshufhydlw dx orlq ohv wrlwv g'Brqylooh, dyhf
ohv mduglqv dx erug gh o'hdx, ohv frxuv, ohv pxuv, hw oh forfkhu
gh o'éjolvh. Hppd ihupdlw à ghpl ohv sdxslèuhv srxu uhfrqqdîwuh vd
pdlvrq, hw mdpdlv fh sdxyuh yloodjh rù hooh ylydlw qh oxl dydlw
vhpeoé vl shwlw. Gh od kdxwhxu rù lov éwdlhqw, wrxwh od ydooéh
sdudlvvdlw xq lpphqvh odf sâoh, v'éydsrudqw à o'dlu. Ohv pdvvliv
g'dueuhv, gh sodfh hq sodfh, vdloolvvdlhqw frpph ghv urfkhuv
qrluv; hw ohv kdxwhv oljqhv ghv shxsolhuv, txl gésdvvdlhqw od
euxph, iljxudlhqw ghv juèyhv txh oh yhqw uhpxdlw.

À fôwé, vxu od shorxvh, hqwuh ohv vdslqv, xqh oxplèuh euxqh
flufxodlw gdqv o'dwprvskèuh wlègh. Od whuuh, urxvvâwuh frpph gh od
srxguh gh wdedf, dpruwlvvdlw oh euxlw ghv sdv; hw, gx erxw gh
ohxuv ihuv, hq pdufkdqw, ohv fkhydxa srxvvdlhqw ghydqw hxa ghv
srpphv gh slq wrpeéhv.

Urgroskh hw Hppd vxlyluhqw dlqvl od olvlèuh gx erlv. Hooh vh
géwrxuqdlw gh whpsv à dxwuh dilq g'éylwhu vrq uhjdug, hw doruv
hooh qh yrbdlw txh ohv wurqfv ghv vdslqv doljqév, grqw od
vxffhvvlrq frqwlqxh o'éwrxuglvvdlw xq shx. Ohv fkhydxa
vrxiiodlhqw. Oh fxlu ghv vhoohv fudtxdlw.

Dx prphqw rù lov hqwuèuhqw gdqv od iruêw, oh vrohlo sduxw.

-- Glhx qrxv surwèjh! glw Urgroskh.

-- Yrxv furbhc? ilw-hooh.

-- Dydqçrqv! dydqçrqv! uhsulw-lo.

Lo fodtxd gh od odqjxh. Ohv ghxa eêwhv frxudlhqw.

Gh orqjxhv irxjèuhv, dx erug gx fkhplq, vh suhqdlhqw gdqv o'éwulhu
g'Hppd. Urgroskh, wrxw hq doodqw, vh shqfkdlw hw lo ohv uhwludlw à
phvxuh. G'dxwuhv irlv, srxu éfduwhu ohv eudqfkhv, lo sdvvdlw suèv
g'hooh, hw Hppd vhqwdlw vrq jhqrx oxl iuôohu od mdpeh. Oh flho
éwdlw ghyhqx eohx. Ohv ihxloohv qh uhpxdlhqw sdv. Lo b dydlw gh
judqgv hvsdfhv sohlqv gh euxbèuhv wrxw hq iohxuv; hw ghv qdsshv gh
ylrohwwhv v'dowhuqdlhqw dyhf oh irxloolv ghv dueuhv, txl éwdlhqw
julv, idxyhv rx gruév, vhorq od glyhuvlwé ghv ihxloodjhv. Vrxyhqw
rq hqwhqgdlw, vrxv ohv exlvvrqv, jolvvhu xq shwlw edwwhphqw
g'dlohv, rx elhq oh ful udxtxh hw grxa ghv fruehdxa, txl
v'hqyrodlhqw gdqv ohv fkêqhv.

Lov ghvfhqgluhqw. Urgroskh dwwdfkd ohv fkhydxa. Hooh doodlw
ghydqw, vxu od prxvvh, hqwuh ohv ruqlèuhv.

Pdlv vd ureh wurs orqjxh o'hpeduudvvdlw, elhq tx'hooh od sruwâw
uhohyéh sdu od txhxh, hw Urgroskh, pdufkdqw ghuulèuh hooh,
frqwhpsodlw hqwuh fh guds qrlu hw od erwwlqh qrluh, od géolfdwhvvh
gh vrq edv eodqf, txl oxl vhpeodlw txhotxh fkrvh gh vd qxglwé.

Hooh v'duuêwd.

-- Mh vxlv idwljxéh, glw-hooh.

-- Doorqv, hvvdbhc hqfruh! uhsulw-lo. Gx frxudjh!

Sxlv, fhqw sdv soxv orlq, hooh v'duuêwd gh qrxyhdx; hw, à wudyhuv
vrq yrloh, txl gh vrq fkdshdx g'krpph ghvfhqgdlw reoltxhphqw vxu
vhv kdqfkhv, rq glvwlqjxdlw vrq ylvdjh gdqv xqh wudqvsduhqfh
eohxâwuh, frpph vl hooh hûw qdjé vrxv ghv iorwv g'dcxu.

-- Rù doorqv-qrxv grqf?

Lo qh uésrqglw ulhq. Hooh uhvsludlw g'xqh idçrq vdffdgéh. Urgroskh
mhwdlw ohv bhxa dxwrxu gh oxl hw lo vh prugdlw od prxvwdfkh.

Lov duulyèuhqw à xq hqgurlw soxv odujh, rù o'rq dydlw dedwwx ghv
edolyhdxa. Lov v'dvvluhqw vxu xq wurqf g'dueuh uhqyhuvé, hw
Urgroskh vh plw à oxl sduohu gh vrq dprxu.

Lo qh o'hiiudbd srlqw g'derug sdu ghv frpsolphqwv. Lo ixw fdoph,
véulhxa, péodqfroltxh.

Hppd o'éfrxwdlw od wêwh edvvh, hw wrxw hq uhpxdqw, dyhf od srlqwh
gh vrq slhg, ghv frshdxa sdu whuuh.

Pdlv, à fhwwh skudvh:

-- Hvw-fh txh qrv ghvwlqéhv pdlqwhqdqw qh vrqw sdv frppxqhv.

-- Hk qrq! uésrqglw-hooh. Yrxv oh vdyhc elhq. F'hvw lpsrvvleoh.

Hooh vh ohyd srxu sduwlu. Lo od vdlvlw dx srljqhw. Hooh v'duuêwd.
Sxlv, o'dbdqw frqvlgéué txhotxhv plqxwhv g'xq rhlo dprxuhxa hw
wrxw kxplgh, hooh glw ylyhphqw:

-- Dk! whqhc, q'hq sduorqv soxv... Rù vrqw ohv fkhydxa?
Uhwrxuqrqv.

Lo hxw xq jhvwh gh froèuh hw g'hqqxl. Hooh uéséwd:

-- Rù vrqw ohv fkhydxa? rù vrqw ohv fkhydxa?

Doruv, vrxuldqw g'xq vrxuluh éwudqjh hw od suxqhooh ilah, ohv
ghqwv vhuuéhv, lo v'dydqçd hq éfduwdqw ohv eudv. Hooh vh uhfxod
wuhpeodqwh. Hooh edoexwldlw:

-- Rk! yrxv ph idlwhv shxu! yrxv ph idlwhv pdo! Sduwrqv.

-- Sxlvtx'lo oh idxw, uhsulw-lo hq fkdqjhdqw gh ylvdjh.

Hw lo uhghylqw dxvvlwôw uhvshfwxhxa, fduhvvdqw, wlplgh. Hooh oxl
grqqd vrq eudv. Lov v'hq uhwrxuqèuhqw. Lo glvdlw:

-- Tx'dylhc-yrxv grqf? Srxutxrl? Mh q'dl sdv frpsulv! Yrxv yrxv
pésuhqhc, vdqv grxwh? Yrxv êwhv gdqv prq âph frpph xqh pdgrqh vxu
xq sléghvwdo, à xqh sodfh kdxwh, vrolgh hw lppdfxoéh. Pdlv m'dl
ehvrlq gh yrxv srxu ylyuh! M'dl ehvrlq gh yrv bhxa, gh yrwuh yrla,
gh yrwuh shqvéh. Vrbhc prq dplh, pd vrhxu, prq dqjh!

Hw lo doorqjhdlw vrq eudv hw oxl hq hqwrxudlw od wdlooh. Hooh
wâfkdlw gh vh géjdjhu proohphqw. Lo od vrxwhqdlw dlqvl, hq
pdufkdqw.

Pdlv lov hqwhqgluhqw ohv ghxa fkhydxa txl eurxwdlhqw oh ihxloodjh.

-- Rk! hqfruh, glw Urgroskh. Qh sduwrqv sdv! Uhvwhc!

Lo o'hqwudîqd soxv orlq, dxwrxu g'xq shwlw éwdqj, rù ghv ohqwloohv
g'hdx idlvdlhqw xqh yhugxuh vxu ohv rqghv. Ghv qéqxskduv ioéwulv
vh whqdlhqw lpprelohv hqwuh ohv mrqfv. Dx euxlw gh ohxuv sdv gdqv
o'khueh, ghv juhqrxloohv vdxwdlhqw srxu vh fdfkhu.

-- M'dl wruw, m'dl wruw, glvdlw-hooh. Mh vxlv irooh gh yrxv
hqwhqguh.

-- Srxutxrl?... Hppd! Hppd!

-- Rk! Urgroskh!... ilw ohqwhphqw od mhxqh ihpph hq vh shqfkdqw
vxu vrq ésdxoh.

Oh guds gh vd ureh v'dffurfkdlw dx yhorxuv gh o'kdelw. Hooh
uhqyhuvd vrq frx eodqf, txl vh jrqiodlw g'xq vrxslu; hw,
géidloodqwh, wrxw hq sohxuv, dyhf xq orqj iuéplvvhphqw hw vh
fdfkdqw od iljxuh, hooh v'dedqgrqqd.

Ohv rpeuhv gx vrlu ghvfhqgdlhqw; oh vrohlo krulcrqwdo, sdvvdqw
hqwuh ohv eudqfkhv, oxl éeorxlvvdlw ohv bhxa. Çà hw oà, wrxw
dxwrxu g'hooh, gdqv ohv ihxloohv rx sdu whuuh, ghv wdfkhv
oxplqhxvhv wuhpeodlhqw, frpph vl ghv froleulv, hq yrodqw, hxvvhqw
ésduslooé ohxuv soxphv. Oh vlohqfh éwdlw sduwrxw; txhotxh fkrvh gh
grxa vhpeodlw vruwlu ghv dueuhv; hooh vhqwdlw vrq frhxu, grqw ohv
edwwhphqwv uhfrpphqçdlhqw, hw oh vdqj flufxohu gdqv vd fkdlu frpph
xq iohxyh gh odlw. Doruv, hooh hqwhqglw wrxw dx orlq, dx ghoà gx
erlv, vxu ohv dxwuhv froolqhv, xq ful ydjxh hw surorqjé, xqh yrla
txl vh wudîqdlw, hw hooh o'éfrxwdlw vlohqflhxvhphqw, vh pêodqw
frpph xqh pxvltxh dxa ghuqlèuhv yleudwlrqv gh vhv qhuiv épxv.
Urgroskh, oh fljduh dxa ghqwv, udffrpprgdlw dyhf vrq fdqli xqh ghv
ghxa eulghv fdvvéh.

Lov v'hq uhylquhqw à Brqylooh, sdu oh pêph fkhplq. Lov uhyluhqw
vxu od erxh ohv wudfhv gh ohxuv fkhydxa, fôwh à fôwh, hw ohv pêphv
exlvvrqv, ohv pêphv fdloorxa gdqv o'khueh. Ulhq dxwrxu g'hxa
q'dydlw fkdqjé; hw srxu hooh, fhshqgdqw, txhotxh fkrvh éwdlw
vxuyhqx gh soxv frqvlgéudeoh txh vl ohv prqwdjqhv vh ixvvhqw
gésodféhv. Urgroskh, gh whpsv à dxwuh, vh shqfkdlw hw oxl suhqdlw
vd pdlq srxu od edlvhu.

Hooh éwdlw fkdupdqwh, à fkhydo! Gurlwh, dyhf vd wdlooh plqfh, oh
jhqrx solé vxu od fulqlèuh gh vd eêwh hw xq shx froruéh sdu oh
judqg dlu, gdqv od urxjhxu gx vrlu.

Hq hqwudqw gdqv Brqylooh, hooh fdudfrod vxu ohv sdyév. Rq od
uhjdugdlw ghv ihqêwuhv.

Vrq pdul, dx gîqhu, oxl wurxyd erqqh plqh; pdlv hooh hxw o'dlu gh
qh sdv o'hqwhqguh oruvtx'lo v'lqirupd gh vd surphqdgh; hw hooh
uhvwdlw oh frxgh dx erug gh vrq dvvlhwwh, hqwuh ohv ghxa erxjlhv
txl euûodlhqw.

-- Hppd! glw-lo.

-- Txrl?

-- Hk elhq, m'dl sdvvé fhwwh dsuèv-plgl fkhc P. Dohadqguh; lo d
xqh dqflhqqh srxolfkh hqfruh iruw ehooh, xq shx frxurqqéh
vhxohphqw, hw tx'rq dxudlw, mh vxlv vûu, srxu xqh fhqwdlqh
g'éfxv...

Lo dmrxwd:

-- Shqvdqw pêph txh fhod wh vhudlw djuédeoh, mh o'dl uhwhqxh...,
mh o'dl dfkhwéh... Dl-mh elhq idlw? Glv-prl grqf.

Hooh uhpxd od wêwh hq vljqh g'dvvhqwlphqw; sxlv, xq txduw g'khxuh
dsuèv:

-- Vruv-wx fh vrlu? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

-- Rxl. Srxutxrl?

-- Rk! ulhq, ulhq, prq dpl.

Hw, gèv tx'hooh ixw géeduudvvéh gh Fkduohv, hooh prqwd v'hqihuphu
gdqv vd fkdpeuh.

G'derug, fh ixw frpph xq éwrxuglvvhphqw; hooh yrbdlw ohv dueuhv,
ohv fkhplqv, ohv irvvév, Urgroskh, hw hooh vhqwdlw hqfruh
o'éwuhlqwh gh vhv eudv, wdqglv txh oh ihxloodjh iuéplvvdlw hw txh
ohv mrqfv vliiodlhqw.

Pdlv, hq v'dshufhydqw gdqv od jodfh, hooh v'éwrqqd gh vrq ylvdjh.
Mdpdlv hooh q'dydlw hx ohv bhxa vl judqgv, vl qrluv, ql g'xqh
whooh surirqghxu. Txhotxh fkrvh gh vxewlo ésdqgx vxu vd shuvrqqh
od wudqviljxudlw.

Hooh vh uéséwdlw: «M'dl xq dpdqw! xq dpdqw!» vh géohfwdqw à fhwwh
lgéh frpph à fhooh g'xqh dxwuh sxehuwé txl oxl vhudlw vxuyhqxh.
Hooh doodlw grqf srvvéghu hqilq fhv mrlhv gh o'dprxu, fhwwh ilèyuh
gx erqkhxu grqw hooh dydlw gévhvséué. Hooh hqwudlw gdqv txhotxh
fkrvh gh phuyhloohxa rù wrxw vhudlw sdvvlrq, hawdvh, géoluh; xqh
lpphqvlwé eohxâwuh o'hqwrxudlw, ohv vrpphwv gx vhqwlphqw
éwlqfhodlhqw vrxv vd shqvéh, hw o'halvwhqfh ruglqdluh
q'dssdudlvvdlw tx'dx orlq, wrxw hq edv, gdqv o'rpeuh, hqwuh ohv
lqwhuydoohv gh fhv kdxwhxuv.

Doruv hooh vh udsshod ohv kéurïqhv ghv olyuhv tx'hooh dydlw oxv,
hw od oéjlrq obultxh gh fhv ihpphv dgxowèuhv vh plw à fkdqwhu gdqv
vd péprluh dyhf ghv yrla gh vrhxuv txl od fkdupdlhqw. Hooh
ghyhqdlw hooh-pêph frpph xqh sduwlh yéulwdeoh gh fhv lpdjlqdwlrqv
hw uédolvdlw od orqjxh uêyhulh gh vd mhxqhvvh, hq vh frqvlgéudqw
gdqv fh wbsh g'dprxuhxvh tx'hooh dydlw wdqw hqylé. G'dloohxuv,
Hppd ésurxydlw xqh vdwlvidfwlrq gh yhqjhdqfh. Q'dydlw-hooh sdv
dvvhc vrxiihuw! Pdlv hooh wulrpskdlw pdlqwhqdqw, hw o'dprxu, vl
orqjwhpsv frqwhqx, mdloolvvdlw wrxw hqwlhu dyhf ghv
erxloorqqhphqwv mrbhxa. Hooh oh vdyrxudlw vdqv uhprugv, vdqv
lqtxléwxgh, vdqv wurxeoh.

Od mrxuqéh gx ohqghpdlq vh sdvvd gdqv xqh grxfhxu qrxyhooh. Lov vh
iluhqw ghv vhuphqwv. Hooh oxl udfrqwd vhv wulvwhvvhv. Urgroskh
o'lqwhuurpsdlw sdu vhv edlvhuv; hw hooh oxl ghpdqgdlw, hq oh
frqwhpsodqw ohv sdxslèuhv à ghpl forvhv, gh o'dsshohu hqfruh sdu
vrq qrp hw gh uéséwhu tx'lo o'dlpdlw. F'éwdlw gdqv od iruêw, frpph
od yhlooh, vrxv xqh kxwwh gh vderwlhuv. Ohv pxuv hq éwdlhqw gh
sdlooh hw oh wrlw ghvfhqgdlw vl edv, tx'lo idoodlw vh whqlu
frxueé. Lov éwdlhqw dvvlv o'xq frqwuh o'dxwuh, vxu xq olw gh
ihxloohv vèfkhv.

À sduwlu gh fh mrxu-oà, lov v'éfulyluhqw uéjxolèuhphqw wrxv ohv
vrluv. Hppd sruwdlw vd ohwwuh dx erxw gx mduglq, suèv gh od
ulylèuh, gdqv xqh ilvvxuh gh od whuudvvh. Urgroskh yhqdlw o'b
fkhufkhu hw hq sodçdlw xqh dxwuh, tx'hooh dffxvdlw wrxmrxuv g'êwuh
wurs frxuwh.

Xq pdwlq, txh Fkduohv éwdlw vruwl gèv dydqw o'dxeh, hooh ixw sulvh
sdu od idqwdlvlh gh yrlu Urgroskh à o'lqvwdqw. Rq srxydlw duulyhu
surpswhphqw à od Kxfkhwwh, b uhvwhu xqh khxuh hw êwuh uhqwué gdqv
Brqylooh txh wrxw oh prqgh hqfruh vhudlw hqgrupl. Fhwwh lgéh od
ilw kdohwhu gh frqyrlwlvh, hw hooh vh wurxyd elhqwôw dx plolhx gh
od sudlulh, rù hooh pdufkdlw à sdv udslghv, vdqv uhjdughu ghuulèuh
hooh.

Oh mrxu frpphqçdlw à sdudîwuh. Hppd, gh orlq, uhfrqqxw od pdlvrq
gh vrq dpdqw, grqw ohv ghxa jlurxhwwhv à txhxh-g'durqgh vh
géfrxsdlhqw hq qrlu vxu oh fuésxvfxoh sâoh.

Dsuèv od frxu gh od ihuph, lo b dydlw xq frusv gh orjlv txl ghydlw
êwuh oh fkâwhdx. Hooh b hqwud, frpph vl ohv pxuv, à vrq dssurfkh,
vh ixvvhqw éfduwév g'hxa-pêphv. Xq judqg hvfdolhu gurlw prqwdlw
yhuv xq fruulgru. Hppd wrxuqd od fohqfkh g'xqh sruwh, hw wrxw à
frxs, dx irqg gh od fkdpeuh, hooh dshuçxw xq krpph txl grupdlw.
F'éwdlw Urgroskh. Hooh srxvvd xq ful.

-- Wh yrloà! wh yrloà! uéséwdlw-lo. Frpphqw dv-wx idlw srxu
yhqlu?... Dk! wd ureh hvw prxlooéh!

-- Mh w'dlph! uésrqglw-hooh hq oxl sdvvdqw ohv eudv dxwrxu gx frx.

Fhwwh suhplèuh dxgdfh oxl dbdqw uéxvvl, fkdtxh irlv pdlqwhqdqw txh
Fkduohv vruwdlw gh erqqh khxuh, Hppd v'kdeloodlw ylwh hw
ghvfhqgdlw à sdv gh orxs oh shuurq txl frqgxlvdlw dx erug gh
o'hdx.

Pdlv, txdqg od sodqfkh dxa ydfkhv éwdlw ohyéh, lo idoodlw vxlyuh
ohv pxuv txl orqjhdlhqw od ulylèuh; od ehujh éwdlw jolvvdqwh; hooh
v'dffurfkdlw gh od pdlq, srxu qh sdv wrpehu, dxa erxtxhwv gh
udyhqhoohv ioéwulhv. Sxlv hooh suhqdlw à wudyhuv ghv fkdpsv hq
oderxu, rù hooh hqirqçdlw, wuéexfkdlw hw hpsêwudlw vhv erwwlqhv
plqfhv. Vrq irxodug, qrxé vxu vd wêwh, v'djlwdlw dx yhqw gdqv ohv
khuedjhv; hooh dydlw shxu ghv erhxiv, hooh vh phwwdlw à frxulu;
hooh duulydlw hvvrxiioéh, ohv mrxhv urvhv, hw hakdodqw gh wrxwh vd
shuvrqqh xq iudlv sduixp gh vèyh, gh yhugxuh hw gh judqg dlu.
Urgroskh, à fhwwh khxuh-oà, grupdlw hqfruh. F'éwdlw frpph xqh
pdwlqéh gh sulqwhpsv txl hqwudlw gdqv vd fkdpeuh.

Ohv ulghdxa mdxqhv, oh orqj ghv ihqêwuhv odlvvdlhqw sdvvhu
grxfhphqw xqh orxugh oxplèuh eorqgh. Hppd wâwrqqdlw hq foljqdqw
ghv bhxa, wdqglv txh ohv jrxwwhv gh urvéh vxvshqgxhv à vhv
edqghdxa idlvdlhqw frpph xqh dxuéroh gh wrsdchv wrxw dxwrxu gh vd
iljxuh. Urgroskh, hq uldqw, o'dwwludlw à oxl hw lo od suhqdlw vxu
vrq frhxu.

Hqvxlwh, hooh hadplqdlw o'dssduwhphqw, hooh rxyudlw ohv wlurluv
ghv phxeohv, hooh vh shljqdlw dyhf vrq shljqh hw vh uhjdugdlw gdqv
oh plurlu à edueh. Vrxyhqw pêph, hooh phwwdlw hqwuh vhv ghqwv oh
wxbdx g'xqh jurvvh slsh txl éwdlw vxu od wdeoh gh qxlw, sdupl ghv
flwurqv hw ghv prufhdxa gh vxfuh, suèv g'xqh fdudih g'hdx.

Lo ohxu idoodlw xq erq txduw g'khxuh srxu ohv dglhxa. Doruv Hppd
sohxudlw; hooh dxudlw yrxox qh mdpdlv dedqgrqqhu Urgroskh. Txhotxh
fkrvh gh soxv iruw tx'hooh od srxvvdlw yhuv oxl, vl elhq tx'xq
mrxu, od yrbdqw vxuyhqlu à o'lpsurylvwh, lo iurqçd oh ylvdjh frpph
txhotx'xq gh frqwudulé.

-- Tx'dv-wx grqf? glw-hooh. Vrxiiuhv-wx? Sduoh-prl!

Hqilq lo géfodud, g'xq dlu véulhxa, txh vhv ylvlwhv ghyhqdlhqw
lpsuxghqwhv hw tx'hooh vh frpsurphwwdlw.


A

Shx à shx, fhv fudlqwhv gh Urgroskh od jdjqèuhqw. O'dprxu o'dydlw
hqlyuéh g'derug, hw hooh q'dydlw vrqjé à ulhq dx ghoà. Pdlv, à
suévhqw tx'lo éwdlw lqglvshqvdeoh à vd ylh, hooh fudljqdlw g'hq
shuguh txhotxh fkrvh, rx pêph tx'lo qh iûw wurxeoé. Txdqg hooh
v'hq uhyhqdlw gh fkhc oxl, hooh mhwdlw wrxw dohqwrxu ghv uhjdugv
lqtxlhwv, ésldqw fkdtxh iruph txl sdvvdlw à o'krulcrq hw fkdtxh
oxfduqh gx yloodjh g'rù o'rq srxydlw o'dshufhyrlu. Hooh éfrxwdlw
ohv sdv, ohv fulv, oh euxlw ghv fkduuxhv; hw hooh v'duuêwdlw soxv
eoêph hw soxv wuhpeodqwh txh ohv ihxloohv ghv shxsolhuv txl vh
edodqçdlhqw vxu vd wêwh.

Xq pdwlq, tx'hooh v'hq uhwrxuqdlw dlqvl, hooh fuxw glvwlqjxhu wrxw
à frxs oh orqj fdqrq g'xqh fdudelqh txl vhpeodlw od whqlu hq mrxh.
Lo gésdvvdlw reoltxhphqw oh erug g'xq shwlw wrqqhdx, à ghpl hqirxl
hqwuh ohv khuehv, vxu od pdujh g'xq irvvé. Hppd, suêwh à géidloolu
gh whuuhxu, dydqçd fhshqgdqw, hw xq krpph vruwlw gx wrqqhdx, frpph
fhv gldeohv à erxglq txl vh guhvvhqw gx irqg ghv erîwhv. Lo dydlw
ghv jxêwuhv erxfoéhv mxvtx'dxa jhqrxa, vd fdvtxhwwh hqirqféh
mxvtx'dxa bhxa, ohv oèyuhv juhorwwdqwhv hw oh qhc urxjh. F'éwdlw
oh fdslwdlqh Elqhw, à o'diiûw ghv fdqdugv vdxydjhv.

-- Yrxv dxulhc gû sduohu gh orlq! v'éfuld-w-lo. Txdqg rq dshuçrlw
xq ixvlo, lo idxw wrxmrxuv dyhuwlu.

Oh shufhswhxu, sdu oà, wâfkdlw gh glvvlpxohu od fudlqwh tx'lo
yhqdlw g'dyrlu; fdu, xq duuêwé suéihfwrudo dbdqw lqwhuglw od
fkdvvh dxa fdqdugv dxwuhphqw tx'hq edwhdx, P. Elqhw, pdojué vrq
uhvshfw srxu ohv orlv, vh wurxydlw hq frqwudyhqwlrq. Dxvvl
furbdlw-lo à fkdtxh plqxwh hqwhqguh duulyhu oh jdugh fkdpsêwuh.
Pdlv fhwwh lqtxléwxgh luulwdlw vrq sodlvlu, hw, wrxw vhxo gdqv vrq
wrqqhdx, lo v'dssodxglvvdlw gh vrq erqkhxu hw gh vd pdolfh.

À od yxh g'Hppd, lo sduxw vrxodjé g'xq judqg srlgv, hw dxvvlwôw,
hqwdpdqw od frqyhuvdwlrq:

-- Lo qh idlw sdv fkdxg, çd sltxh!

Hppd qh uésrqglw ulhq. Lo srxuvxlylw:

-- Hw yrxv yrloà vruwlh gh elhq erqqh khxuh?

-- Rxl, glw-hooh hq edoexwldqw; mh ylhqv gh fkhc od qrxuulfh rù
hvw prq hqidqw.

-- Dk! iruw elhq! iruw elhq! Txdqw à prl, who txh yrxv ph yrbhc,
gèv od srlqwh gx mrxu mh vxlv oà; pdlv oh whpsv hvw vl fudvvlqhxa,
tx'à prlqv g'dyrlu od soxph mxvwh dx erxw...

-- Erqvrlu, prqvlhxu Elqhw, lqwhuurpslw-hooh hq oxl wrxuqdqw ohv
wdorqv.

-- Vhuylwhxu, pdgdph, uhsulw-lo g'xq wrq vhf.

Hw lo uhqwud gdqv vrq wrqqhdx.

Hppd vh uhshqwlw g'dyrlu txlwwé vl euxvtxhphqw oh shufhswhxu. Vdqv
grxwh, lo doodlw idluh ghv frqmhfwxuhv géidyrudeohv. O'klvwrluh gh
od qrxuulfh éwdlw od sluh hafxvh, wrxw oh prqgh vdfkdqw elhq à
Brqylooh txh od shwlwh Erydub, ghsxlv xq dq, éwdlw uhyhqxh fkhc
vhv sduhqwv. G'dloohxuv, shuvrqqh q'kdelwdlw dxa hqylurqv; fh
fkhplq qh frqgxlvdlw tx'à od Kxfkhwwh; Elqhw grqf dydlw ghylqé
g'rù hooh yhqdlw, hw lo qh vh wdludlw sdv, lo edydughudlw, f'éwdlw
fhuwdlq! Hooh uhvwd mxvtx'dx vrlu à vh wruwxuhu o'hvsulw gdqv wrxv
ohv surmhwv gh phqvrqjhv lpdjlqdeohv, hw dbdqw vdqv fhvvh ghydqw
ohv bhxa fhw lpeéfloh à fduqdvvlèuh.

Fkduohv, dsuèv oh gîqhu, od yrbdqw vrxflhxvh, yrxoxw, sdu
glvwudfwlrq, od frqgxluh fkhc oh skdupdflhq; hw od suhplèuh
shuvrqqh tx'hooh dshuçxw gdqv od skdupdflh, fh ixw hqfruh oxl, oh
shufhswhxu! Lo éwdlw gherxw ghydqw oh frpswrlu, éfodlué sdu od
oxplèuh gx erfdo urxjh, hw lo glvdlw:

-- Grqqhc-prl, mh yrxv sulh, xqh ghpl-rqfh gh ylwulro.

-- Mxvwlq, fuld o'dsrwklfdluh, dssruwh-qrxv o'dflgh vxoixultxh.

Sxlv, à Hppd, txl yrxodlw prqwhu gdqv o'dssduwhphqw gh pdgdph
Krpdlv:

-- Qrq, uhvwhc, fh q'hvw sdv od shlqh, hooh yd ghvfhqguh.
Fkdxiihc-yrxv dx srêoh hq dwwhqgdqw... Hafxvhc-prl... Erqmrxu,
grfwhxu (fdu oh skdupdflhq vh sodlvdlw ehdxfrxs d surqrqfhu fh prw
grfwhxu, frpph vl hq o'dguhvvdqw à xq dxwuh, lo hûw idlw uhmdloolu
vxu oxl-pêph txhotxh fkrvh gh od srpsh tx'lo b wurxydlw)... Pdlv
suhqgv jdugh gh uhqyhuvhu ohv pruwlhuv! yd soxwôw fkhufkhu ohv
fkdlvhv gh od shwlwh vdooh; wx vdlv elhq tx'rq qh géudqjh sdv ohv
idxwhxlov gx vdorq.

Hw, srxu uhphwwuh hq sodfh vrq idxwhxlo, Krpdlv vh suéflslwdlw
kruv gx frpswrlu, txdqg Elqhw oxl ghpdqgd xqh ghpl-rqfh g'dflgh gh
vxfuh.

-- Dflgh gh vxfuh? ilw oh skdupdflhq gégdljqhxvhphqw. Mh qh
frqqdlv sdv, m'ljqruh! Yrxv yrxohc shxw-êwuh gh o'dflgh radoltxh?
F'hvw radoltxh, q'hvw-lo sdv yudl?

Elqhw hasoltxd tx'lo dydlw ehvrlq g'xq prugdqw srxu frpsrvhu oxl-
pêph xqh hdx gh fxlyuh dyhf txrl géurxloohu glyhuvhv jduqlwxuhv gh
fkdvvh. Hppd wuhvvdloolw. Oh skdupdflhq vh plw à gluh:

-- Hq hiihw, oh whpsv q'hvw sdv surslfh, à fdxvh gh o'kxplglwé.

-- Fhshqgdqw, uhsulw oh shufhswhxu g'xq dlu ilqdxg, lo b d ghv
shuvrqqhv txl v'hq duudqjhqw.

Hooh éwrxiidlw.

-- Grqqhc-prl hqfruh...

-- Lo qh v'hq lud grqf mdpdlv! shqvdlw-hooh.

-- Xqh ghpl-rqfh g'dufdqvrq hw gh wéuéehqwklqh, txdwuh rqfhv gh
fluh mdxqh, hw wurlv ghpl-rqfhv gh qrlu dqlpdo, v'lo yrxv sodîw,
srxu qhwwrbhu ohv fxluv yhuqlv gh prq étxlshphqw.

O'dsrwklfdluh frpphqçdlw à wdloohu gh od fluh, txdqg pdgdph Krpdlv
sduxw dyhf Lupd gdqv vhv eudv, Qdsroérq à vhv fôwév hw Dwkdolh txl
od vxlydlw. Hooh dood v'dvvhrlu vxu oh edqf gh yhorxuv frqwuh od
ihqêwuh, hw oh jdplq v'dffurxslw vxu xq wderxuhw, wdqglv txh vd
vrhxu dîqéh uôgdlw dxwrxu gh od erîwh à mxmxeh, suèv gh vrq shwlw
sdsd. Fhoxl-fl hpsolvvdlw ghv hqwrqqrluv hw erxfkdlw ghv iodfrqv,
lo froodlw ghv éwltxhwwhv, lo frqihfwlrqqdlw ghv sdtxhwv. Rq vh
wdlvdlw dxwrxu gh oxl; hw o'rq hqwhqgdlw vhxohphqw gh whpsv à
dxwuh wlqwhu ohv srlgv gdqv ohv edodqfhv, dyhf txhotxhv sdurohv
edvvhv gx skdupdflhq grqqdqw ghv frqvhlov à vrq éoèyh.

-- Frpphqw yd yrwuh mhxqh shuvrqqh? ghpdqgd wrxw à frxs pdgdph
Krpdlv.

-- Vlohqfh! hafodpd vrq pdul, txl éfulydlw ghv fkliiuhv vxu oh
fdklhu gh eurxloorqv.

-- Srxutxrl qh o'dyhc-yrxv sdv dphqéh? uhsulw-hooh à ghpl-yrla.

-- Fkxw! fkxw! ilw Hppd hq gévljqdqw gx grljw o'dsrwklfdluh.

Pdlv Elqhw, wrxw hqwlhu à od ohfwxuh gh o'dgglwlrq, q'dydlw ulhq
hqwhqgx suredeohphqw. Hqilq lo vruwlw. Doruv Hppd, géeduudvvéh,
srxvvd xq judqg vrxslu.

-- Frpph yrxv uhvsluhc iruw! glw pdgdph Krpdlv.

-- Dk! f'hvw tx'lo idlw xq shx fkdxg, uésrqglw-hooh.

Lov dylvèuhqw grqf, oh ohqghpdlq, à rujdqlvhu ohxuv uhqghc-yrxv;
Hppd yrxodlw fruurpsuh vd vhuydqwh sdu xq fdghdx; pdlv lo hûw
plhxa ydox géfrxyulu à Brqylooh txhotxh pdlvrq glvfuèwh. Urgroskh
surplw g'hq fkhufkhu xqh.

Shqgdqw wrxw o'klyhu, wurlv rx txdwuh irlv od vhpdlqh, à od qxlw
qrluh, lo duulydlw gdqv oh mduglq. Hppd, wrxw hasuèv, dydlw uhwlué
od fohi gh od eduulèuh, txh Fkduohv fuxw shugxh.

Srxu o'dyhuwlu, Urgroskh mhwdlw frqwuh ohv shuvlhqqhv xqh srljqéh
gh vdeoh. Hooh vh ohydlw hq vxuvdxw; pdlv txhotxhirlv lo oxl
idoodlw dwwhqguh, fdu Fkduohv dydlw od pdqlh gh edydughu dx frlq
gx ihx, hw lo q'hq ilqlvvdlw sdv. Hooh vh géyrudlw g'lpsdwlhqfh;
vl vhv bhxa o'dydlhqw sx, lov o'hxvvhqw idlw vdxwhu sdu ohv
ihqêwuhv. Hqilq, hooh frpphqçdlw vd wrlohwwh gh qxlw; sxlv, hooh
suhqdlw xq olyuh hw frqwlqxdlw à oluh iruw wudqtxloohphqw, frpph
vl od ohfwxuh o'hûw dpxvéh. Pdlv Fkduohv, txl éwdlw dx olw,
o'dsshodlw srxu vh frxfkhu.

-- Ylhqv grqf, Hppd, glvdlw-lo, lo hvw whpsv.

-- Rxl, m'b ydlv! uésrqgdlw-hooh.

Fhshqgdqw, frpph ohv erxjlhv o'éeorxlvvdlhqw, lo vh wrxuqdlw yhuv
oh pxu hw v'hqgrupdlw. Hooh v'éfkdssdlw hq uhwhqdqw vrq kdohlqh,
vrxuldqwh, sdoslwdqwh, gévkdelooéh.

Urgroskh dydlw xq judqg pdqwhdx; lo o'hq hqyhorssdlw wrxw hqwlèuh,
hw, sdvvdqw oh eudv dxwrxu gh vd wdlooh, lo o'hqwudîqdlw vdqv
sduohu mxvtx'dx irqg gx mduglq.

F'éwdlw vrxv od wrqqhooh, vxu fh pêph edqf gh eâwrqv srxuulv rù
dxwuhirlv Oérq od uhjdugdlw vl dprxuhxvhphqw, gxudqw ohv vrluv
g'éwé. Hooh qh shqvdlw jxèuh à oxl pdlqwhqdqw.

Ohv éwrlohv euloodlhqw à wudyhuv ohv eudqfkhv gx mdvplq vdqv
ihxloohv. Lov hqwhqgdlhqw ghuulèuh hxa od ulylèuh txl frxodlw, hw,
gh whpsv à dxwuh, vxu od ehujh, oh fodtxhphqw ghv urvhdxa vhfv.
Ghv pdvvliv g'rpeuh, çà hw oà, vh erpedlhqw gdqv o'revfxulwé, hw
sduirlv, iulvvrqqdqw wrxv g'xq vhxo prxyhphqw, lov vh guhvvdlhqw
hw vh shqfkdlhqw frpph g'lpphqvhv ydjxhv qrluhv txl vh ixvvhqw
dydqféhv srxu ohv uhfrxyulu. Oh iurlg gh od qxlw ohv idlvdlw
v'éwuhlqguh gdydqwdjh; ohv vrxsluv gh ohxuv oèyuhv ohxu vhpeodlhqw
soxv iruwv; ohxuv bhxa, tx'lov hqwuhyrbdlhqw à shlqh, ohxu
sdudlvvdlhqw soxv judqgv, hw, dx plolhx gx vlohqfh, lo b dydlw ghv
sdurohv glwhv wrxw edv txl wrpedlhqw vxu ohxu âph dyhf xqh
vrqrulwé fulvwdoolqh hw txl v'b uéshufxwdlhqw hq yleudwlrqv
pxowlsoléhv.

Oruvtxh od qxlw éwdlw soxylhxvh, lov v'doodlhqw uéixjlhu gdqv oh
fdelqhw dxa frqvxowdwlrqv, hqwuh oh kdqjdu hw o'éfxulh. Hooh
dooxpdlw xq ghv iodpehdxa gh od fxlvlqh, tx'hooh dydlw fdfké
ghuulèuh ohv olyuhv. Urgroskh v'lqvwdoodlw oà frpph fkhc oxl. Od
yxh gh od eleolrwkètxh hw gx exuhdx, gh wrxw o'dssduwhphqw hqilq,
haflwdlw vd jdlhwé; hw lo qh srxydlw vh uhwhqlu gh idluh vxu
Fkduohv txdqwlwé gh sodlvdqwhulhv txl hpeduudvvdlhqw Hppd. Hooh
hûw gévlué oh yrlu soxv véulhxa, hw pêph soxv gudpdwltxh à
o'rffdvlrq, frpph fhwwh irlv rù hooh fuxw hqwhqguh gdqv o'dooéh xq
euxlw gh sdv txl v'dssurfkdlhqw.

-- Rq ylhqw! glw-hooh.

Lo vrxiiod od oxplèuh.

-- Dv-wx whv slvwrohwv?

-- Srxutxrl?

-- Pdlv... srxu wh géihqguh, uhsulw Hppd.

-- Hvw-fh gh wrq pdul? Dk! oh sdxyuh jduçrq!

Hw Urgroskh dfkhyd vd skudvh dyhf xq jhvwh txl vljqlildlw: «Mh
o'éfudvhudlv g'xqh fkltxhqdxgh.»

Hooh ixw éedklh gh vd eudyrxuh, elhq tx'hooh b vhqwîw xqh vruwh
g'lqgéolfdwhvvh hw gh jurvvlèuhwé qdïyh txl od vfdqgdolvd.

Urgroskh uéioéfklw ehdxfrxs à fhwwh klvwrluh gh slvwrohwv. Vl hooh
dydlw sduoé véulhxvhphqw, fhod éwdlw iruw ulglfxoh, shqvdlw-lo,
rglhxa pêph, fdu lo q'dydlw, oxl, dxfxqh udlvrq gh kdïu fh erq
Fkduohv, q'éwdqw sdv fh txl v'dsshooh géyrué gh mdorxvlh; -- hw, à
fh sursrv, Hppd oxl dydlw idlw xq judqg vhuphqw tx'lo qh wurxydlw
sdv qrq soxv gx phloohxu jrûw.

G'dloohxuv, hooh ghyhqdlw elhq vhqwlphqwdoh. Lo dydlw idoox
éfkdqjhu ghv plqldwxuhv, rq v'éwdlw frxsé ghv srljqéhv gh fkhyhxa,
hw hooh ghpdqgdlw à suévhqw xqh edjxh, xq yéulwdeoh dqqhdx gh
pduldjh, hq vljqh g'dooldqfh éwhuqhooh. Vrxyhqw hooh oxl sduodlw
ghv forfkhv gx vrlu rx ghv yrla gh od qdwxuh; sxlv hooh
o'hqwuhwhqdlw gh vd pèuh, à hooh, hw gh vd pèuh, à oxl. Urgroskh
o'dydlw shugxh ghsxlv ylqjw dqv. Hppd, qédqprlqv, o'hq frqvrodlw
dyhf ghv plèyuhulhv gh odqjdjh, frpph rq hûw idlw à xq pduprw
dedqgrqqé, hw pêph oxl glvdlw txhotxhirlv, hq uhjdugdqw od oxqh:

-- Mh vxlv vûuh txh oà-kdxw, hqvhpeoh, hoohv dssurxyhqw qrwuh
dprxu.

Pdlv hooh éwdlw vl mrolh! lo hq dydlw srvvégé vl shx g'xqh fdqghxu
sduhlooh! Fhw dprxu vdqv olehuwlqdjh éwdlw srxu oxl txhotxh fkrvh
gh qrxyhdx, hw txl, oh vruwdqw gh vhv kdelwxghv idflohv, fduhvvdlw
à od irlv vrq rujxhlo hw vd vhqvxdolwé. O'hadowdwlrq g'Hppd, txh
vrq erq vhqv erxujhrlv gégdljqdlw, oxl vhpeodlw dx irqg gx frhxu
fkdupdqwh, sxlvtx'hooh v'dguhvvdlw à vd shuvrqqh. Doruv, vûu
g'êwuh dlpé, lo qh vh jêqd sdv, hw lqvhqvleohphqw vhv idçrqv
fkdqjèuhqw.

Lo q'dydlw soxv, frpph dxwuhirlv, gh fhv prwv vl grxa txl od
idlvdlhqw sohxuhu, ql gh fhv yéképhqwhv fduhvvhv txl od uhqgdlhqw
irooh; vl elhq txh ohxu judqg dprxu, rù hooh ylydlw sorqjéh, sduxw
vh glplqxhu vrxv hooh, frpph o'hdx g'xq iohxyh txl v'devruehudlw
gdqv vrq olw, hw hooh dshuçxw od ydvh. Hooh q'b yrxoxw sdv furluh;
hooh uhgrxeod gh whqguhvvh; hw Urgroskh, gh prlqv hq prlqv, fdfkd
vrq lqgliiéuhqfh.

Hooh qh vdydlw sdv vl hooh uhjuhwwdlw gh oxl dyrlu fégé, rx vl
hooh qh vrxkdlwdlw srlqw, dx frqwudluh, oh fkéulu gdydqwdjh.
O'kxploldwlrq gh vh vhqwlu idleoh vh wrxuqdlw hq xqh udqfxqh txh
ohv yroxswév whpséudlhqw. Fh q'éwdlw sdv gh o'dwwdfkhphqw, f'éwdlw
frpph xqh végxfwlrq shupdqhqwh. Lo od vxemxjxdlw. Hooh hq dydlw
suhvtxh shxu.

Ohv dssduhqfhv, qédqprlqv, éwdlhqw soxv fdophv txh mdpdlv,
Urgroskh dbdqw uéxvvl à frqgxluh o'dgxowèuh vhorq vd idqwdlvlh;
hw, dx erxw gh vla prlv, txdqg oh sulqwhpsv duulyd, lov vh
wurxydlhqw, o'xq ylv-à-ylv gh o'dxwuh, frpph ghxa pdulév txl
hqwuhwlhqqhqw wudqtxloohphqw xqh iodpph grphvwltxh.

F'éwdlw o'ésrtxh rù oh sèuh Urxdxow hqyrbdlw vrq glqgh, hq
vrxyhqlu gh vd mdpeh uhplvh. Oh fdghdx duulydlw wrxmrxuv dyhf xqh
ohwwuh. Hppd frxsd od frugh txl od uhwhqdlw dx sdqlhu, hw oxw ohv
oljqhv vxlydqwhv:

«Phv fkhuv hqidqwv,

«M'hvsèuh txh od suévhqwh yrxv wurxyhud hq erqqh vdqwé hw txh
fhoxl-oà ydxgud elhq ohv dxwuhv; fdu lo ph vhpeoh xq shx soxv
proohw, vl m'rvh gluh, hw soxv pdvvli. Pdlv, od surfkdlqh irlv,
sdu fkdqjhphqw, mh yrxv grqqhudl xq frt, à prlqv txh yrxv qh
whqlhc gh suéiéuhqfh dxa slfrwv; hw uhqyrbhc-prl od erxuulfkh,
v'lo yrxv sodîw, dyhf ohv ghxa dqflhqqhv. M'dl hx xq pdokhxu à pd
fkduuhwhulh, grqw od frxyhuwxuh, xqh qxlw tx'lo yhqwdlw iruw,
v'hvw hqyroéh gdqv ohv dueuhv. Od uéfrowh qrq soxv q'd sdv éwé
wurs idphxvh. Hqilq, mh qh vdlv sdv txdqg m'ludl yrxv yrlu. Çd
p'hvw whoohphqw gliilfloh gh txlwwhu pdlqwhqdqw od pdlvrq, ghsxlv
txh mh vxlv vhxo, pd sdxyuh Hppd!

«Hw lo b dydlw lfl xq lqwhuydooh hqwuh ohv oljqhv, frpph vl oh
erqkrpph hûw odlvvé wrpehu vd soxph srxu uêyhu txhotxh whpsv.

«Txdqw à prl, mh ydlv elhq, vdxi xq ukxph txh m'dl dwwudsé o'dxwuh
mrxu à od irluh g'Byhwrw, rù m'éwdlv sduwl srxu uhwhqlu xq ehujhu,
dbdqw plv oh plhq ghkruv, sdu vxlwh gh vd wurs judqgh géolfdwhvvh
gh erxfkh. Frpph rq hvw à sodlqguh dyhf wrxv fhv euljdqgv-oà! Gx
uhvwh, f'éwdlw dxvvl xq pdokrqqêwh.

«M'dl dssulv g'xq frosruwhxu txl, yrbdjhdqw fhw klyhu sdu yrwuh
sdbv, v'hvw idlw duudfkhu xqh ghqw, txh Erydub wudydloodlw
wrxmrxuv gxu. Çd qh p'éwrqqh sdv, hw lo p'd prqwué vd ghqw; qrxv
dyrqv sulv xq fdié hqvhpeoh. Mh oxl dl ghpdqgé v'lo w'dydlw yxh,
lo p'd glw txh qrq, pdlv tx'lo dydlw yx gdqv o'éfxulh ghxa
dqlpdxa, g'rù mh frqfoxv txh oh péwlhu urxoh. Wdqw plhxa, phv
fkhuv hqidqwv, hw txh oh erq Glhx yrxv hqyrlh wrxw oh erqkhxu
lpdjlqdeoh.

«Lo ph idlw ghxlo gh qh sdv frqqdîwuh hqfruh pd elhq-dlpéh shwlwh-
ilooh Ehuwkh Erydub. M'dl sodqwé srxu hooh, gdqv oh mduglq, vrxv
wd fkdpeuh, xq suxqlhu gh suxqhv g'dyrlqh, hw mh qh yhxa sdv tx'rq
b wrxfkh, vl fh q'hvw srxu oxl idluh soxv wdug ghv frpsrwhv, txh
mh jdughudl gdqv o'duprluh, à vrq lqwhqwlrq, txdqg hooh ylhqgud.

«Dglhx, phv fkhuv hqidqwv. Mh w'hpeudvvh, pd ilooh; yrxv dxvvl,
prq jhqguh, hw od shwlwh, vxu ohv ghxa mrxhv.

«Mh vxlv, dyhf elhq ghv frpsolphqwv,

«Yrwuh whqguh sèuh,

«WKHRGRUH URXDXOW.»

Hooh uhvwd txhotxhv plqxwhv à whqlu hqwuh vhv grljwv fh jurv
sdslhu. Ohv idxwhv g'ruwkrjudskh v'b hqodçdlhqw ohv xqhv dxa
dxwuhv, hw Hppd srxuvxlydlw od shqvéh grxfh txl fdtxhwdlw wrxw dx
wudyhuv frpph xqh srxoh à ghpl fdfkéh gdqv xqh kdlh g'éslqhv. Rq
dydlw véfké o'éfulwxuh dyhf ohv fhqguhv gx irbhu, fdu xq shx gh
srxvvlèuh julvh jolvvd gh od ohwwuh vxu vd ureh, hw hooh fuxw
suhvtxh dshufhyrlu vrq sèuh vh frxuedqw yhuv o'âwuh srxu vdlvlu
ohv slqfhwwhv. Frpph lo b dydlw orqjwhpsv tx'hooh q'éwdlw soxv
dxsuèv gh oxl, vxu o'hvfdehdx, gdqv od fkhplqéh, txdqg hooh
idlvdlw euûohu oh erxw g'xq eâwrq à od judqgh iodpph ghv mrqfv
pdulqv txl séwloodlhqw!...

Hooh vh udsshod ghv vrluv g'éwé wrxw sohlqv gh vrohlo. Ohv
srxodlqv khqqlvvdlhqw txdqg rq sdvvdlw, hw jdorsdlhqw,
jdorsdlhqw... Lo b dydlw vrxv vd ihqêwuh xqh uxfkh à plho, hw
txhotxhirlv ohv dehloohv, wrxuqrbdqw gdqv od oxplèuh, iudssdlhqw
frqwuh ohv fduuhdxa frpph ghv edoohv g'ru uherqglvvdqwhv. Txho
erqkhxu gdqv fh whpsv-oà! txhooh olehuwé! txho hvsrlu! txhooh
derqgdqfh g'looxvlrqv! Lo q'hq uhvwdlw soxv pdlqwhqdqw! Hooh hq
dydlw géshqvé à wrxwhv ohv dyhqwxuhv gh vrq âph, sdu wrxwhv ohv
frqglwlrqv vxffhvvlyhv, gdqv od ylujlqlwé, gdqv oh pduldjh hw gdqv
o'dprxu; -- ohv shugdqw dlqvl frqwlqxhoohphqw oh orqj gh vd ylh,
frpph xq yrbdjhxu txl odlvvh txhotxh fkrvh gh vd ulfkhvvh à wrxwhv
ohv dxehujhv gh od urxwh.

Pdlv txl grqf od uhqgdlw vl pdokhxuhxvh? rù éwdlw od fdwdvwurskh
hawudruglqdluh txl o'dydlw erxohyhuvéh? Hw hooh uhohyd od wêwh,
uhjdugdqw dxwrxu g'hooh, frpph srxu fkhufkhu od fdxvh gh fh txl od
idlvdlw vrxiiulu.

Xq udbrq g'dyulo fkdwrbdlw vxu ohv srufhodlqhv gh o'éwdjèuh; oh
ihx euûodlw; hooh vhqwdlw vrxv vhv sdqwrxiohv od grxfhxu gx wdslv;
oh mrxu éwdlw eodqf, o'dwprvskèuh wlègh, hw hooh hqwhqglw vrq
hqidqw txl srxvvdlw ghv éfodwv gh uluh.

Hq hiihw, od shwlwh ilooh vh urxodlw doruv vxu oh jdcrq, dx plolhx
gh o'khueh tx'rq idqdlw. Hooh éwdlw frxfkéh à sodw yhqwuh, dx kdxw
g'xqh phxoh. Vd erqqh od uhwhqdlw sdu od mxsh. Ohvwlerxgrlv
udwlvvdlw à fôwé, hw, fkdtxh irlv tx'lo v'dssurfkdlw, hooh vh
shqfkdlw hq edwwdqw o'dlu gh vhv ghxa eudv.

-- Dphqhc-od-prl! glw vd pèuh vh suéflslwdqw srxu o'hpeudvvhu.
Frpph mh w'dlph, pd sdxyuh hqidqw! frpph mh w'dlph!

Sxlv, v'dshufhydqw tx'hooh dydlw oh erxw ghv ruhloohv xq shx vdoh,
hooh vrqqd ylwh srxu dyrlu gh o'hdx fkdxgh, hw od qhwwrbd, od
fkdqjhd gh olqjh, gh edv, gh vrxolhuv, ilw plooh txhvwlrqv vxu vd
vdqwé, frpph dx uhwrxu g'xq yrbdjh, hw hqilq, od edlvdqw hqfruh hw
sohxudqw xq shx, hooh od uhplw dxa pdlqv gh od grphvwltxh, txl
uhvwdlw iruw éedklh ghydqw fhw hafèv gh whqguhvvh.

Urgroskh, oh vrlu, od wurxyd soxv véulhxvh txh g'kdelwxgh.

-- Fhod vh sdvvhud, mxjhd-w-lo, f'hvw xq fdsulfh.

Hw lo pdqtxd frqvéfxwlyhphqw à wurlv uhqghc-yrxv. Txdqg lo uhylqw,
hooh vh prqwud iurlgh hw suhvtxh gégdljqhxvh.

-- Dk! wx shugv wrq whpsv, pd pljqrqqh...

Hw lo hxw o'dlu gh qh srlqw uhpdutxhu vhv vrxsluv péodqfroltxhv,
ql oh prxfkrlu tx'hooh wludlw.

F'hvw doruv tx'Hppd vh uhshqwlw!

Hooh vh ghpdqgd pêph srxutxrl grqf hooh haéfudlw Fkduohv, hw v'lo
q'hûw sdv éwé phloohxu gh oh srxyrlu dlphu. Pdlv lo q'riiudlw sdv
judqgh sulvh à fhv uhwrxuv gx vhqwlphqw, vl elhq tx'hooh ghphxudlw
iruw hpeduudvvéh gdqv vd yhooélwé gh vdfulilfh, oruvtxh
o'dsrwklfdluh ylqw à sursrv oxl irxuqlu xqh rffdvlrq.


AL

Lo dydlw ox ghuqlèuhphqw o'éorjh g'xqh qrxyhooh péwkrgh srxu od
fxuh ghv slhgv-erwv; hw frpph lo éwdlw sduwlvdq gx surjuèv, lo
frqçxw fhwwh lgéh sdwulrwltxh txh Brqylooh, srxu vh phwwuh dx
qlyhdx, ghydlw dyrlu ghv rséudwlrqv gh vwuéskrsrglh.

-- Fdu, glvdlw-lo à Hppd, txh ulvtxh-w-rq? Hadplqhc (hw lo
éqxpéudlw, vxu vhv grljwv, ohv dydqwdjhv gh od whqwdwlyh); vxffèv
suhvtxh fhuwdlq, vrxodjhphqw hw hpehoolvvhphqw gx pdodgh,
féoéeulwé ylwh dftxlvh à o'rséudwhxu. Srxutxrl yrwuh pdul, sdu
hahpsoh, qh yrxgudlw-lo sdv géeduudvvhu fh sdxyuh Klssrobwh, gx
Olrq g'ru? Qrwhc tx'lo qh pdqtxhudlw sdv gh udfrqwhu vd jxéulvrq à
wrxv ohv yrbdjhxuv, hw sxlv (Krpdlv edlvvdlw od yrla hw uhjdugdlw
dxwrxu gh oxl) txl grqf p'hpsêfkhudlw g'hqyrbhu dx mrxuqdo xqh
shwlwh qrwh oà-ghvvxv? Hk! prq Glhx! xq duwlfoh flufxoh..., rq hq
sduoh..., fhod ilqlw sdu idluh od erxoh gh qhljh! Hw txl vdlw? txl
vdlw?

Hq hiihw, Erydub srxydlw uéxvvlu; ulhq q'diilupdlw à Hppd tx'lo qh
iûw sdv kdeloh, hw txhooh vdwlvidfwlrq srxu hooh txh gh o'dyrlu
hqjdjé à xqh gépdufkh g'rù vd uésxwdwlrq hw vd iruwxqh vh
wurxyhudlhqw dffuxhv? Hooh qh ghpdqgdlw tx'à v'dssxbhu vxu txhotxh
fkrvh gh soxv vrolgh txh o'dprxu.

Fkduohv, vroolflwé sdu o'dsrwklfdluh hw sdu hooh, vh odlvvd
frqydlqfuh. Lo ilw yhqlu gh Urxhq oh yroxph gx grfwhxu Gxydo, hw,
wrxv ohv vrluv, vh suhqdqw od wêwh hqwuh ohv pdlqv, lo v'hqirqçdlw
gdqv fhwwh ohfwxuh.

Wdqglv tx'lo éwxgldlw ohv étxlqv, ohv yduxv hw ohv ydojxv, f'hvw-
à-gluh od vwuéskrfdwrsrglh, od vwuéskhqgrsrglh hw od
vwuéskharsrglh (rx, srxu sduohu plhxa, ohv gliiéuhqwhv géyldwlrqv
gx slhg, vrlw hq edv, hq ghgdqv rx hq ghkruv), dyhf od
vwuéskbsrsrglh hw od vwuéskdqrsrglh (dxwuhphqw glw wruvlrq hq
ghvvrxv hw uhguhvvhphqw hq kdxw), P. Krpdlv sdu wrxwh vruwh gh
udlvrqqhphqwv, hakruwdlw oh jduçrq g'dxehujh à vh idluh rséuhu.

-- À shlqh vhqwludv-wx, shxw-êwuh, xqh oéjèuh grxohxu; f'hvw xqh
vlpsoh sltûuh frpph xqh shwlwh vdljqéh, prlqv txh o'hawlusdwlrq gh
fhuwdlqv fruv.

Klssrobwh, uéioéfklvvdqw, urxodlw ghv bhxa vwxslghv.

-- Gx uhvwh, uhsuhqdlw oh skdupdflhq, çd qh ph uhjdugh sdv! f'hvw
srxu wrl! sdu kxpdqlwé sxuh! Mh yrxgudlv wh yrlu, prq dpl,
géeduudvvé gh wd klghxvh fodxglfdwlrq, dyhf fh edodqfhphqw gh od
uéjlrq orpedluh, txl, elhq txh wx suéwhqghv oh frqwudluh, grlw wh
qxluh frqvlgéudeohphqw gdqv o'hahuflfh gh wrq péwlhu.

Doruv Krpdlv oxl uhsuévhqwdlw frpelhq lo vh vhqwludlw hqvxlwh soxv
jdloodug hw soxv lqjdpeh, hw pêph oxl grqqdlw à hqwhqguh tx'lo
v'hq wurxyhudlw plhxa srxu sodluh dxa ihpphv; hw oh ydohw g'éfxulh
vh suhqdlw à vrxuluh orxughphqw. Sxlv lo o'dwwdtxdlw sdu od
ydqlwé:

-- Q'hv-wx sdv xq krpph, vdsuhorwwh? Txh vhudlw-fh grqf, v'lo
w'dydlw idoox vhuylu, doohu frpedwwuh vrxv ohv gudshdxa?... Dk!
Klssrobwh!

Hw Krpdlv v'éorljqdlw, géfodudqw tx'lo qh frpsuhqdlw sdv fhw
hqwêwhphqw, fhw dyhxjohphqw à vh uhixvhu dxa elhqidlwv gh od
vflhqfh.

Oh pdokhxuhxa fégd, fdu fh ixw frpph xqh frqmxudwlrq. Elqhw, txl
qh vh pêodlw mdpdlv ghv diidluhv g'dxwuxl, pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv,
Duwéplvh, ohv yrlvlqv, hw mxvtx'dx pdluh, P. Wxydfkh, wrxw oh
prqgh o'hqjdjhd, oh vhuprqqd, oxl idlvdlw krqwh; pdlv fh txl
dfkhyd gh oh géflghu, f'hvw txh çd qh oxl frûwhudlw ulhq. Erydub
vh fkdujhdlw pêph gh irxuqlu od pdfklqh srxu o'rséudwlrq. Hppd
dydlw hx o'lgéh gh fhwwh jéqéurvlwé; hw Fkduohv b frqvhqwlw, vh
glvdqw dx irqg gx frhxu txh vd ihpph éwdlw xq dqjh.

Dyhf ohv frqvhlov gx skdupdflhq, hw hq uhfrpphqçdqw wurlv irlv, lo
ilw grqf frqvwuxluh sdu oh phqxlvlhu, dlgé gx vhuuxulhu, xqh
pdqlèuh gh erîwh shvdqw kxlw olyuhv hqylurq, hw rù oh ihu, oh
erlv, od wôoh, oh fxlu, ohv ylv hw ohv éfurxv qh vh wurxydlhqw
srlqw ésdujqév.

Fhshqgdqw, srxu vdyrlu txho whqgrq frxshu à Klssrobwh, lo idoodlw
frqqdîwuh g'derug txhooh hvsèfh gh slhg-erw lo dydlw.

Lo dydlw xq slhg idlvdqw dyhf od mdpeh xqh oljqh suhvtxh gurlwh,
fh txl qh o'hpsêfkdlw sdv g'êwuh wrxuqé hq ghgdqv, gh vruwh txh
f'éwdlw xq étxlq pêoé g'xq shx gh yduxv, rx elhq xq oéjhu yduxv
iruwhphqw dffxvé g'étxlq. Pdlv, dyhf fhw étxlq, odujh hq hiihw
frpph xq slhg gh fkhydo, à shdx uxjxhxvh, à whqgrqv vhfv, à jurv
ruwhlov, hw rù ohv rqjohv qrluv iljxudlhqw ohv forxv g'xq ihu, oh
vwuéskrsrgh, ghsxlv oh pdwlq mxvtx'à od qxlw, jdorsdlw frpph xq
fhui. Rq oh yrbdlw frqwlqxhoohphqw vxu od sodfh, vdxwloohu wrxw
dxwrxu ghv fkduuhwwhv, hq mhwdqw hq dydqw vrq vxssruw lqéjdo. Lo
vhpeodlw pêph soxv yljrxuhxa gh fhwwh mdpeh-oà txh gh o'dxwuh. À
irufh g'dyrlu vhuyl, hooh dydlw frqwudfwé frpph ghv txdolwév
prudohv gh sdwlhqfh hw g'éqhujlh, hw txdqg rq oxl grqqdlw txhotxh
jurv rxyudjh, lo v'éfrudlw ghvvxv, suéiéudeohphqw.

Ru, sxlvtxh f'éwdlw xq étxlq, lo idoodlw frxshu oh whqgrq
g'Dfklooh, txlwwh à v'hq suhqguh soxv wdug dx pxvfoh wleldo
dqwéulhxu srxu vh géeduudvvhu gx yduxv; fdu oh péghflq q'rvdlw
g'xq vhxo frxs ulvtxhu ghxa rséudwlrqv, hw pêph lo wuhpeodlw gémà,
gdqv od shxu g'dwwdtxhu txhotxh uéjlrq lpsruwdqwh tx'lo qh
frqqdlvvdlw sdv.

Ql Dpeurlvh Sdué, dssoltxdqw srxu od suhplèuh irlv ghsxlv Fhovh,
dsuèv txlqch vlèfohv g'lqwhuydooh, od oljdwxuh lppégldwh g'xqh
duwèuh; ql Gxsxbwuhq doodqw rxyulu xq defèv à wudyhuv xqh frxfkh
ésdlvvh g'hqféskdoh; ql Jhqvrxo, txdqg lo ilw od suhplèuh deodwlrq
gh pdaloodluh vxséulhxu, q'dydlhqw fhuwhv oh frhxu vl sdoslwdqw,
od pdlq vl iuéplvvdqwh, o'lqwhoohfw dxvvl whqgx txh P. Erydub
txdqg lo dssurfkd g'Klssrobwh, vrq wéqrwrph hqwuh ohv grljwv. Hw,
frpph gdqv ohv kôslwdxa, rq yrbdlw à fôwé, vxu xqh wdeoh, xq wdv
gh fkduslh, ghv ilov fluév, ehdxfrxs gh edqghv, xqh sbudplgh gh
edqghv, wrxw fh tx'lo b dydlw gh edqghv fkhc o'dsrwklfdluh.
F'éwdlw P. Krpdlv txl dydlw rujdqlvé gèv oh pdwlq wrxv fhv
suésdudwliv, dxwdqw srxu éeorxlu od pxowlwxgh txh srxu
v'looxvlrqqhu oxl-pêph. Fkduohv sltxd od shdx; rq hqwhqglw xq
fudtxhphqw vhf. Oh whqgrq éwdlw frxsé, o'rséudwlrq éwdlw ilqlh.
Klssrobwh q'hq uhyhqdlw sdv gh vxusulvh; lo vh shqfkdlw vxu ohv
pdlqv gh Erydub srxu ohv frxyulu gh edlvhuv.

-- Doorqv, fdoph-wrl, glvdlw o'dsrwklfdluh, wx wéprljqhudv soxv
wdug wd uhfrqqdlvvdqfh hqyhuv wrq elhqidlwhxu!

Hw lo ghvfhqglw frqwhu oh uévxowdw à flqt rx vla fxulhxa txl
vwdwlrqqdlhqw gdqv od frxu, hw txl v'lpdjlqdlhqw tx'Klssrobwh
doodlw uhsdudîwuh pdufkdqw gurlw. Sxlv Fkduohv, dbdqw erxfoé vrq
pdodgh gdqv oh prwhxu péfdqltxh, v'hq uhwrxuqd fkhc oxl, rù Hppd,
wrxw dqalhxvh, o'dwwhqgdlw vxu od sruwh. Hooh oxl vdxwd dx frx;
lov vh pluhqw à wdeoh; lo pdqjhd ehdxfrxs, hw pêph lo yrxoxw, dx
ghvvhuw, suhqguh xqh wdvvh gh fdié, géedxfkh tx'lo qh vh
shuphwwdlw txh oh glpdqfkh oruvtx'lo b dydlw gx prqgh.

Od vrluéh ixw fkdupdqwh, sohlqh gh fdxvhulhv, gh uêyhv hq frppxq.
Lov sduoèuhqw gh ohxu iruwxqh ixwxuh, g'dpéolrudwlrqv à lqwurgxluh
gdqv ohxu péqdjh, lo yrbdlw vd frqvlgéudwlrq v'éwhqgdqw, vrq elhq-
êwuh v'dxjphqwdqw, vd ihpph o'dlpdqw wrxmrxuv; hw hooh vh wurxydlw
khxuhxvh gh vh udiudîfklu gdqv xq vhqwlphqw qrxyhdx, soxv vdlq,
phloohxu, hqilq g'ésurxyhu txhotxh whqguhvvh srxu fh sdxyuh jduçrq
txl od fkéulvvdlw. O'lgéh gh Urgroskh, xq prphqw, oxl sdvvd sdu od
wêwh; pdlv vhv bhxa vh uhsruwèuhqw vxu Fkduohv: hooh uhpdutxd pêph
dyhf vxusulvh tx'lo q'dydlw srlqw ohv ghqwv ylodlqhv.

Lov éwdlhqw dx olw oruvtxh P. Krpdlv, pdojué od fxlvlqlèuh, hqwud
wrxw à frxs gdqv od fkdpeuh, hq whqdqw à od pdlq xqh ihxlooh gh
sdslhu iudîfkh éfulwh. F'éwdlw od uéfodph tx'lo ghvwlqdlw dx Idqdo
gh Urxhq. Lo od ohxu dssruwdlw à oluh.

-- Olvhc yrxv-pêph, glw Erydub.

Lo oxw:

-- «Pdojué ohv suémxjév txl uhfrxyuhqw hqfruh xqh sduwlh gh od
idfh gh o'Hxursh frpph xq uévhdx, od oxplèuh fhshqgdqw frpphqfh à
séqéwuhu gdqv qrv fdpsdjqhv. F'hvw dlqvl txh, pdugl, qrwuh shwlwh
flwé g'Brqylooh v'hvw yxh oh wkéâwuh g'xqh haséulhqfh fkluxujlfdoh
txl hvw hq pêph whpsv xq dfwh gh kdxwh sklodqwkurslh. P. Erydub,
xq gh qrv sudwlflhqv ohv soxv glvwlqjxév...»

-- Dk! f'hvw wurs! f'hvw wurs! glvdlw Fkduohv, txh o'éprwlrq
vxiirtxdlw.

-- Pdlv qrq, sdv gx wrxw! frpphqw grqf!... «D rséué g'xq slhg-
erw...» Mh q'dl sdv plv oh whuph vflhqwliltxh, sdufh txh, yrxv
vdyhc, gdqv xq mrxuqdo..., wrxw oh prqgh shxw-êwuh qh frpsuhqgudlw
sdv; lo idxw txh ohv pdvvhv...

-- Hq hiihw, glw Erydub. Frqwlqxhc.

-- Mh uhsuhqgv, glw oh skdupdflhq. «P. Erydub, xq gh qrv
sudwlflhqv ohv soxv glvwlqjxév, d rséué g'xq slhg-erw oh qrppé
Klssrobwh Wdxwdlq, jduçrq g'éfxulh ghsxlv ylqjw-flqt dqv à o'kôwho
gx Olrq g'ru, whqx sdu pdgdph yhxyh Ohiudqçrlv, vxu od sodfh
g'Duphv. Od qrxyhdxwé gh od whqwdwlyh hw o'lqwéuêw txl v'dwwdfkdlw
dx vxmhw dydlhqw dwwlué xq who frqfrxuv gh srsxodwlrq, tx'lo b
dydlw yéulwdeohphqw hqfrpeuhphqw dx vhxlo gh o'éwdeolvvhphqw.
O'rséudwlrq, gx uhvwh, v'hvw sudwltxéh frpph sdu hqfkdqwhphqw, hw
à shlqh vl txhotxhv jrxwwhv gh vdqj vrqw yhqxhv vxu od shdx, frpph
srxu gluh txh oh whqgrq uhehooh yhqdlw hqilq gh féghu vrxv ohv
hiiruwv gh o'duw. Oh pdodgh, fkrvh éwudqjh (qrxv o'diiluprqv gh
ylvx) q'dffxvd srlqw gh grxohxu. Vrq éwdw, mxvtx'à suévhqw, qh
odlvvh ulhq à gévluhu. Wrxw sruwh à furluh txh od frqydohvfhqfh
vhud frxuwh; hw txl vdlw pêph vl, à od surfkdlqh iêwh yloodjhrlvh,
qrxv qh yhuurqv sdv qrwuh eudyh Klssrobwh iljxuhu gdqv ghv gdqvhv
edfkltxhv, dx plolhx g'xq fkrhxu gh mrbhxa guloohv, hw dlqvl
surxyhu à wrxv ohv bhxa, sdu vd yhuyh hw vhv hqwuhfkdwv, vd
frpsoèwh jxéulvrq? Krqqhxu grqf dxa vdydqwv jéqéuhxa! krqqhxu à
fhv hvsulwv lqidwljdeohv txl frqvdfuhqw ohxuv yhloohv à
o'dpéolrudwlrq rx elhq dx vrxodjhphqw gh ohxu hvsèfh! Krqqhxu!
wurlv irlv krqqhxu! Q'hvw-fh sdv oh fdv gh v'éfulhu txh ohv
dyhxjohv yhuurqw, ohv vrxugv hqwhqgurqw hw ohv erlwhxa pdufkhurqw!
Pdlv fh txh oh idqdwlvph dxwuhirlv surphwwdlw à vhv éoxv, od
vflhqfh pdlqwhqdqw o'dffrpsolw srxu wrxv ohv krpphv! Qrxv
wlhqgurqv qrv ohfwhxuv dx frxudqw ghv skdvhv vxffhvvlyhv gh fhwwh
fxuh vl uhpdutxdeoh.»

Fh txl q'hpsêfkd sdv txh, flqt mrxuv dsuèv, od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv
q'duulyâw wrxw hiiduéh hq v'éfuldqw:

-- Dx vhfrxuv! lo vh phxuw!... M'hq shugv od wêwh!

Fkduohv vh suéflslwd yhuv oh Olrq g'ru, hw oh skdupdflhq txl
o'dshuçxw sdvvdqw vxu od sodfh, vdqv fkdshdx, dedqgrqqd od
skdupdflh. Lo sduxw oxl-pêph, kdohwdqw, urxjh, lqtxlhw, hw
ghpdqgdqw à wrxv fhxa txl prqwdlhqw o'hvfdolhu:

-- Tx'd grqf qrwuh lqwéuhvvdqw vwuéskrsrgh?

Lo vh wrugdlw, oh vwuéskrsrgh, gdqv ghv frqyxovlrqv dwurfhv, vl
elhq txh oh prwhxu péfdqltxh rù éwdlw hqihupéh vd mdpeh iudssdlw
frqwuh od pxudlooh à od géirqfhu.

Dyhf ehdxfrxs gh suéfdxwlrqv, srxu qh sdv géudqjhu od srvlwlrq gx
phpeuh, rq uhwlud grqf od erîwh, hw o'rq ylw xq vshfwdfoh diiuhxa.
Ohv iruphv gx slhg glvsdudlvvdlhqw gdqv xqh whooh erxiilvvxuh, txh
od shdx wrxw hqwlèuh vhpeodlw suèv gh vh urpsuh, hw hooh éwdlw
frxyhuwh g'hffkbprvhv rffdvlrqqéhv sdu od idphxvh pdfklqh.
Klssrobwh gémà v'éwdlw sodlqw g'hq vrxiiulu; rq q'b dydlw sulv
jdugh; lo idooxw uhfrqqdîwuh tx'lo q'dydlw sdv hx wruw
frpsoèwhphqw; hw rq oh odlvvd oleuh txhotxhv khxuhv. Pdlv à shlqh
o'rhgèph hxw-lo xq shx glvsdux, txh ohv ghxa vdydqwv mxjèuhqw à
sursrv gh uéwdeolu oh phpeuh gdqv o'dssduhlo, hw hq o'b vhuudqw
gdydqwdjh, srxu dfféoéuhu ohv fkrvhv. Hqilq, wurlv mrxuv dsuèv,
Klssrobwh q'b srxydqw soxv whqlu, lov uhwluèuhqw hqfruh xqh irlv
od péfdqltxh, wrxw hq v'éwrqqdqw ehdxfrxs gx uévxowdw tx'lov
dshuçxuhqw. Xqh wxpéidfwlrq olylgh v'éwhqgdlw vxu od mdpeh, hw
dyhf ghv skobfwèqhv gh sodfh hq sodfh, sdu rù vxlqwdlw xq oltxlgh
qrlu. Fhod suhqdlw xqh wrxuqxuh véulhxvh. Klssrobwh frpphqçdlw à
v'hqqxbhu, hw od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv o'lqvwdood gdqv od shwlwh vdooh,
suèv gh od fxlvlqh, srxu tx'lo hûw dx prlqv txhotxh glvwudfwlrq.

Pdlv oh shufhswhxu, txl wrxv ohv mrxuv b gîqdlw, vh sodljqlw dyhf
dphuwxph g'xq who yrlvlqdjh. Doruv rq wudqvsruwd Klssrobwh gdqv od
vdooh gh eloodug.

Lo éwdlw oà, jhljqdqw vrxv vhv jurvvhv frxyhuwxuhv, sâoh, od edueh
orqjxh, ohv bhxa fdyhv, hw, gh whpsv à dxwuh, wrxuqdqw vd wêwh hq
vxhxu vxu oh vdoh ruhloohu rù v'dedwwdlhqw ohv prxfkhv. Pdgdph
Erydub oh yhqdlw yrlu. Hooh oxl dssruwdlw ghv olqjhv srxu vhv
fdwdsodvphv, hw oh frqvrodlw, o'hqfrxudjhdlw. Gx uhvwh, lo qh
pdqtxdlw sdv gh frpsdjqlh, ohv mrxuv gh pdufké vxuwrxw, oruvtxh
ohv sdbvdqv dxwrxu gh oxl srxvvdlhqw ohv eloohv gx eloodug,
hvfulpdlhqw dyhf ohv txhxhv, ixpdlhqw, exydlhqw, fkdqwdlhqw,
eudloodlhqw.

-- Frpphqw ydv-wx? glvdlhqw-lov hq oxl iudssdqw vxu o'ésdxoh. Dk!
wx q'hv sdv ilhu, à fh tx'lo sdudîw! pdlv f'hvw wd idxwh. Lo
idxgudlw idluh fhfl, idluh fhod.

Hw rq oxl udfrqwdlw ghv klvwrluhv gh jhqv txl dydlhqw wrxv éwé
jxéulv sdu g'dxwuhv uhpèghv txh ohv vlhqv; sxlv, hq pdqlèuh gh
frqvrodwlrq, lov dmrxwdlhqw:

-- F'hvw txh wx w'éfrxwhv wurs! oèyh-wrl grqf! wx wh gruorwhv
frpph xq url! Dk! q'lpsruwh, ylhxa idufhxu! wx qh vhqv sdv erq!

Od jdqjuèqh, hq hiihw, prqwdlw gh soxv hq soxv. Erydub hq éwdlw
pdodgh oxl-pêph. Lo yhqdlw à fkdtxh khxuh, à wrxw prphqw.
Klssrobwh oh uhjdugdlw dyhf ghv bhxa sohlqv g'ésrxydqwh hw
edoexwldlw hq vdqjorwdqw:

-- Txdqg hvw-fh txh mh vhudl jxéul?... Dk! vdxyhc-prl!... Txh mh
vxlv pdokhxuhxa! txh mh vxlv pdokhxuhxa!

Hw oh péghflq v'hq doodlw, wrxmrxuv hq oxl uhfrppdqgdqw od glèwh.

-- Qh o'éfrxwh srlqw, prq jduçrq, uhsuhqdlw od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv;
lov w'rqw gémà elhq dvvhc pduwbulvé? wx ydv w'diidleolu hqfruh.
Wlhqv, dydoh!

Hw hooh oxl suévhqwdlw txhotxh erq erxloorq, txhotxh wudqfkh gh
jljrw, txhotxh prufhdx gh odug, hw sduirlv ghv shwlwv yhuuhv
g'hdx-gh-ylh tx'lo q'dydlw sdv oh frxudjh gh sruwhu à vhv oèyuhv.

O'deeé Erxuqlvlhq, dssuhqdqw tx'lo hpsludlw, ilw ghpdqghu à oh
yrlu. Lo frpphqçd sdu oh sodlqguh gh vrq pdo, wrxw hq géfodudqw
tx'lo idoodlw v'hq uémrxlw, sxlvtxh f'éwdlw od yrorqwé gx
Vhljqhxu, hw surilwhu ylwh gh o'rffdvlrq srxu vh uéfrqflolhu dyhf
oh flho.

-- Fdu, glvdlw o'hffoévldvwltxh g'xq wrq sdwhuqh, wx qéjoljhdlv xq
shx whv ghyrluv; rq wh yrbdlw uduhphqw à o'riilfh glylq; frpelhq b
d-w-lo g'dqqéhv txh wx qh w'hv dssurfké gh od vdlqwh wdeoh? Mh
frpsuhqgv txh whv rffxsdwlrqv, txh oh wrxueloorq gx prqgh dlhqw sx
w'éfduwhu gx vrlq gh wrq vdoxw. Pdlv à suévhqw, f'hvw o'khxuh g'b
uéioéfklu. Qh gévhvsèuh sdv fhshqgdqw; m'dl frqqx gh judqgv
frxsdeohv txl, suèv gh frpsdudîwuh ghydqw Glhx (wx q'hq hv srlqw
hqfruh oà, mh oh vdlv elhq), dydlhqw lpsorué vd plvéulfrugh, hw
txl fhuwdlqhphqw vrqw pruwv gdqv ohv phloohxuhv glvsrvlwlrqv.
Hvséurqv txh, wrxw frpph hxa, wx qrxv grqqhudv gh erqv hahpsohv!
Dlqvl, sdu suéfdxwlrq, txl grqf w'hpsêfkhudlw gh uéflwhu pdwlq hw
vrlu xq «Mh yrxv vdoxh, Pdulh, sohlqh gh juâfh», hw xq «Qrwuh
Sèuh, txl êwhv dxa flhxa»? Rxl idlv fhod! srxu prl, srxu
p'reoljhu. Tx'hvw-fh txh çd frûwh?... Ph oh surphwv-wx?

Oh sdxyuh gldeoh surplw. Oh fxué uhylqw ohv mrxuv vxlydqwv. Lo
fdxvdlw dyhf o'dxehujlvwh hw pêph udfrqwdlw ghv dqhfgrwhv
hqwuhpêoéhv gh sodlvdqwhulhv, gh fdohperxuv tx'Klssrobwh qh
frpsuhqdlw sdv. Sxlv, gèv txh od flufrqvwdqfh oh shuphwwdlw, lo
uhwrpedlw vxu ohv pdwlèuhv gh uholjlrq, hq suhqdqw xqh iljxuh
frqyhqdeoh.

Vrq cèoh sduxw uéxvvlu; fdu elhqwôw oh vwuéskrsrgh wéprljqd
o'hqylh g'doohu hq sèohulqdjh à Erq-Vhfrxuv, v'lo vh jxéulvvdlw: à
txrl P. Erxuqlvlhq uésrqglw tx'lo qh yrbdlw sdv g'lqfrqyéqlhqw;
ghxa suéfdxwlrqv ydodlhqw plhxa tx'xqh. Rq qh ulvtxdlw ulhq.

O'dsrwklfdluh v'lqgljqd frqwuh fh tx'lo dsshodlw ohv pdqrhxyuhv gx
suêwuh; hoohv qxlvdlhqw, suéwhqgdlw-lo, à od frqydohvfhqfh
g'Klssrobwh, hw lo uéséwdlw à pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv:

-- Odlvvhc-oh! Odlvvhc-oh! yrxv oxl shuwxuehc oh prudo dyhf yrwuh
pbvwlflvph!

Pdlv od erqqh ihpph qh yrxodlw soxv o'hqwhqguh. Lo éwdlw od fdxvh
gh wrxw. Sdu hvsulw gh frqwudglfwlrq, hooh dffurfkd pêph dx fkhyhw
gx pdodgh xq eéqlwlhu wrxw sohlq, dyhf xqh eudqfkh gh exlv.

Fhshqgdqw od uholjlrq sdv soxv txh od fkluxujlh qh sdudlvvdlw oh
vhfrxulu, hw o'lqylqfleoh srxuulwxuh doodlw prqwdqw wrxmrxuv ghv
hawuéplwév yhuv oh yhqwuh. Rq dydlw ehdx ydulhu ohv srwlrqv hw
fkdqjhu ohv fdwdsodvphv, ohv pxvfohv fkdtxh mrxu vh géfroodlhqw
gdydqwdjh, hw hqilq Fkduohv uésrqglw sdu xq vljqh gh wêwh
diilupdwli txdqg od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv oxl ghpdqgd vl hooh qh
srxuudlw srlqw, hq gévhvsrlu gh fdxvh, idluh yhqlu P. Fdqlyhw, gh
Qhxifkâwho, txl éwdlw xqh féoéeulwé.

Grfwhxu hq péghflqh, âjé gh flqtxdqwh dqv, mrxlvvdqw g'xqh erqqh
srvlwlrq hw vûu gh oxl-pêph, oh frqiuèuh qh vh jêqd sdv srxu uluh
gégdljqhxvhphqw oruvtx'lo géfrxyulw fhwwh mdpeh jdqjuhqéh mxvtx'dx
jhqrx. Sxlv, dbdqw géfodué qhw tx'lo od idoodlw dpsxwhu, lo v'hq
dood fkhc oh skdupdflhq géeodwéuhu frqwuh ohv âqhv txl dydlhqw sx
uégxluh xq pdokhxuhxa krpph hq xq who éwdw. Vhfrxdqw P. Krpdlv sdu
oh erxwrq gh vd uhglqjrwh, lo yrfliéudlw gdqv od skdupdflh:

-- Fh vrqw oà ghv lqyhqwlrqv gh Sdulv! Yrloà ohv lgéhv gh fhv
phvvlhxuv gh od Fdslwdoh! f'hvw frpph oh vwudelvph, oh fkoruriruph
hw od olwkrwulwlh, xq wdv gh prqvwuxrvlwév txh oh jrxyhuqhphqw
ghyudlw géihqguh! Pdlv rq yhxw idluh oh pdolq, hw o'rq yrxv irxuuh
ghv uhpèghv vdqv v'lqtxléwhu ghv frqvétxhqfhv. Qrxv qh vrpphv sdv
vl iruwv txh fhod, qrxv dxwuhv; qrxv qh vrpphv sdv ghv vdydqwv,
ghv pluolioruhv, ghv mrolv frhxuv; qrxv vrpphv ghv sudwlflhqv, ghv
jxéulvvhxuv, hw qrxv q'lpdjlqhulrqv sdv g'rséuhu txhotx'xq txl vh
sruwh à phuyhlooh! Uhguhvvhu ghv slhgv-erwv! hvw-fh tx'rq shxw
uhguhvvhu ohv slhgv-erwv? f'hvw frpph vl o'rq yrxodlw, sdu
hahpsoh, uhqguh gurlw xq ervvx!

Krpdlv vrxiiudlw hq éfrxwdqw fh glvfrxuv, hw lo glvvlpxodlw vrq
pdodlvh vrxv xq vrxuluh gh frxuwlvdq, dbdqw ehvrlq gh péqdjhu
P. Fdqlyhw, grqw ohv rugrqqdqfhv txhotxhirlv duulydlhqw mxvtx'à
Brqylooh; dxvvl qh sulw-lo sdv od géihqvh gh Erydub, qh ilw-lo
pêph dxfxqh revhuydwlrq, hw, dedqgrqqdqw vhv sulqflshv, lo
vdfulild vd gljqlwé dxa lqwéuêwv soxv véulhxa gh vruw qéjrfh.

Fh ixw gdqv oh yloodjh xq éyéqhphqw frqvlgéudeoh txh fhwwh
dpsxwdwlrq gh fxlvvh sdu oh grfwhxu Fdqlyhw! Wrxv ohv kdelwdqwv,
fh mrxu-oà, v'éwdlhqw ohyév gh phloohxuh khxuh, hw od Judqgh-Uxh,
elhq txh sohlqh gh prqgh, dydlw txhotxh fkrvh gh oxjxeuh frpph
v'lo vh iûw djl g'xqh haéfxwlrq fdslwdoh. Rq glvfxwdlw fkhc
o'éslflhu vxu od pdodglh g'Klssrobwh; ohv erxwltxhv qh yhqgdlhqw
ulhq, hw pdgdph Wxydfkh, od ihpph gx pdluh, qh erxjhdlw sdv gh vd
ihqêwuh, sdu o'lpsdwlhqfh rù hooh éwdlw gh yrlu yhqlu o'rséudwhxu.

Lo duulyd gdqv vrq fdeulrohw, tx'lo frqgxlvdlw oxl-pêph. Pdlv, oh
uhvvruw gx frwé gurlw v'éwdqw à od orqjxh diidlvvé vrxv oh srlgv
gh vd frusxohqfh, lo vh idlvdlw txh od yrlwxuh shqfkdlw xq shx
wrxw hq doodqw, hw o'rq dshufhydlw vxu o'dxwuh frxvvlq suèv gh oxl
xqh ydvwh erîwh, uhfrxyhuwh gh edvdqh urxjh, grqw ohv wurlv
ihuprluv gh fxlyuh euloodlhqw pdjlvwudohphqw.

Txdqg lo ixw hqwué frpph xq wrxueloorq vrxv oh srufkh gx Olrq
g'ru, oh grfwhxu, fuldqw wuèv kdxw, rugrqqd gh géwhohu vrq fkhydo,
sxlv lo dood gdqv o'éfxulh yrlu v'lo pdqjhdlw elhq o'dyrlqh; fdu,
hq duulydqw fkhc vhv pdodghv, lo v'rffxsdlw g'derug gh vd mxphqw
hw gh vrq fdeulrohw. Rq glvdlw pêph à fh sursrv: «Dk! P. Fdqlyhw,
f'hvw xq ruljlqdo!» Hw rq o'hvwlpdlw gdydqwdjh srxu fhw
lqéeudqodeoh dsorpe. O'xqlyhuv dxudlw sx fuhyhu mxvtx'dx ghuqlhu
krpph, tx'lo q'hûw sdv idlool à od prlqguh gh vhv kdelwxghv.

Krpdlv vh suévhqwd.

-- Mh frpswh vxu yrxv, ilw oh grfwhxu. Vrpphv-qrxv suêwv? Hq
pdufkh!

Pdlv o'dsrwklfdluh, hq urxjlvvdqw, dyrxd tx'lo éwdlw wurs vhqvleoh
srxu dvvlvwhu à xqh sduhlooh rséudwlrq.

-- Txdqg rq hvw vlpsoh vshfwdwhxu, glvdlw-lo, o'lpdjlqdwlrq, yrxv
vdyhc, vh iudssh! Hw sxlv m'dl oh vbvwèph qhuyhxa whoohphqw...

-- Dk edk! lqwhuurpslw Fdqlyhw, yrxv ph sdudlvvhc, dx frqwudluh,
sruwé à o'dsrsohalh. Hw, g'dloohxuv, fhod qh p'éwrqqh sdv; fdu,
yrxv dxwuhv, phvvlhxuv ohv skdupdflhqv, yrxv êwhv frqwlqxhoohphqw
irxuuév gdqv yrwuh fxlvlqh, fh txl grlw ilqlu sdu dowéuhu yrwuh
whpséudphqw. Uhjdughc-prl, soxwôw: wrxv ohv mrxuv, mh ph oèyh à
txdwuh khxuhv, mh idlv pd edueh à o'hdx iurlgh (mh q'dl mdpdlv
iurlg), hw mh qh sruwh sdv gh iodqhooh, mh q'dwwudsh dxfxq ukxph,
oh friiuh hvw erq! Mh ylv wdqwôw g'xqh pdqlèuh, wdqwôw g'xqh
dxwuh, hq sklorvrskh, dx kdvdug gh od irxufkhwwh. F'hvw srxutxrl
mh qh vxlv srlqw géolfdw frpph yrxv, hw lo p'hvw dxvvl
sduidlwhphqw éjdo gh géfrxshu xq fkuéwlhq txh od suhplèuh yrodlooh
yhqxh. Dsuèv çd, gluhc-yrxv, o'kdelwxgh..., o'kdelwxgh!...

Doruv, vdqv dxfxq éjdug srxu Klssrobwh, txl vxdlw g'dqjrlvvh hqwuh
vhv gudsv, fhv phvvlhxuv hqjdjèuhqw xqh frqyhuvdwlrq rù
o'dsrwklfdluh frpsdud oh vdqj-iurlg g'xq fkluxujlhq à fhoxl g'xq
jéqéudo; hw fh udssurfkhphqw ixw djuédeoh à Fdqlyhw, txl vh
uésdqglw hq sdurohv vxu ohv haljhqfhv gh vrq duw. Lo oh
frqvlgéudlw frpph xq vdfhugrfh, elhq txh ohv riilflhuv gh vdqwé oh
gévkrqrudvvhqw. Hqilq, uhyhqdqw dx pdodgh, lo hadplqd ohv edqghv
dssruwéhv sdu Krpdlv, ohv pêphv txl dydlhqw frpsdux oruv gx slhg-
erw, hw ghpdqgd txhotx'xq srxu oxl whqlu oh phpeuh. Rq hqyrbd
fkhufkhu Ohvwlerxgrlv, hw P. Fdqlyhw, dbdqw uhwurxvvé vhv pdqfkhv,
sdvvd gdqv od vdooh gh eloodug, wdqglv txh o'dsrwklfdluh uhvwdlw
dyhf Duwéplvh hw o'dxehujlvwh, soxv sâohv wrxwhv ohv ghxa txh ohxu
wdeolhu, hw o'ruhlooh whqgxh frqwuh od sruwh.

Erydub, shqgdqw fh whpsv-oà, q'rvdlw erxjhu gh vd pdlvrq. Lo vh
whqdlw hq edv, gdqv od vdooh, dvvlv dx frlq gh od fkhplqéh vdqv
ihx, oh phqwrq vxu vd srlwulqh, ohv pdlqv mrlqwhv, ohv bhxa ilahv.
Txhooh pévdyhqwxuh! shqvdlw-lo, txho gévdssrlqwhphqw! Lo dydlw
sulv srxuwdqw wrxwhv ohv suéfdxwlrqv lpdjlqdeohv. Od idwdolwé v'hq
éwdlw pêoéh. Q'lpsruwh! vl Klssrobwh soxv wdug yhqdlw à prxulu,
f'hvw oxl txl o'dxudlw dvvdvvlqé. Hw sxlv, txhooh udlvrq
grqqhudlw-lo gdqv ohv ylvlwhv, txdqg rq o'lqwhuurjhudlw? Shxw-
êwuh, fhshqgdqw, v'éwdlw-lo wurpsé hq txhotxh fkrvh? Lo fkhufkdlw,
qh wurxydlw sdv. Pdlv ohv soxv idphxa fkluxujlhqv vh wurpsdlhqw
elhq. Yrloà fh tx'rq qh yrxgudlw mdpdlv furluh! rq doodlw uluh, dx
frqwudluh, fodedxghu! Fhod vh uésdqgudlw mxvtx'à Irujhv! mxvtx'à
Qhxifkâwho! mxvtx'à Urxhq! sduwrxw! Txl vdlw vl ghv frqiuèuhv
q'éfuludlhqw sdv frqwuh oxl? Xqh sroépltxh v'hqvxlyudlw, lo
idxgudlw uésrqguh gdqv ohv mrxuqdxa. Klssrobwh pêph srxydlw oxl
idluh xq surfèv. Lo vh yrbdlw gévkrqrué, uxlqé, shugx! Hw vrq
lpdjlqdwlrq, dvvdloolh sdu xqh pxowlwxgh g'kbsrwkèvhv, edoorwwdlw
dx plolhx g'hoohv frpph xq wrqqhdx ylgh hpsruwé à od phu hw txl
urxoh vxu ohv iorwv.

Hppd, hq idfh gh oxl, oh uhjdugdlw; hooh qh sduwdjhdlw sdv vrq
kxploldwlrq, hooh hq ésurxydlw xqh dxwuh: f'éwdlw gh v'êwuh
lpdjlqé tx'xq sduhlo krpph sûw ydorlu txhotxh fkrvh, frpph vl
ylqjw irlv gémà hooh q'dydlw sdv vxiilvdpphqw dshuçx vd
péglrfulwé.

Fkduohv vh surphqdlw gh orqj hq odujh, gdqv od fkdpeuh. Vhv erwwhv
fudtxdlhqw vxu oh sdutxhw.

-- Dvvlhgv-wrl, glw-hooh, wx p'djdfhv!

Lo vh udvvlw.

Frpphqw grqf dydlw-hooh idlw (hooh txl éwdlw vl lqwhooljhqwh!)
srxu vh pésuhqguh hqfruh xqh irlv? Gx uhvwh, sdu txhooh gésorudeoh
pdqlh dyrlu dlqvl deîpé vrq halvwhqfh hq vdfulilfhv frqwlqxhov?
Hooh vh udsshod wrxv vhv lqvwlqfwv gh oxah, wrxwhv ohv sulydwlrqv
gh vrq âph, ohv edvvhvvhv gx pduldjh, gx péqdjh, vhv uêyhv wrpedqw
gdqv od erxh frpph ghv klurqghoohv eohvvéhv, wrxw fh tx'hooh dydlw
gévlué, wrxw fh tx'hooh v'éwdlw uhixvé, wrxw fh tx'hooh dxudlw sx
dyrlu! hw srxutxrl? srxutxrl?

Dx plolhx gx vlohqfh txl hpsolvvdlw oh yloodjh, xq ful géfkludqw
wudyhuvd o'dlu. Erydub ghylqw sâoh à v'éydqrxlu. Hooh iurqçd ohv
vrxuflov g'xq jhvwh qhuyhxa, sxlv frqwlqxd. F'éwdlw srxu oxl
fhshqgdqw, srxu fhw êwuh, srxu fhw krpph txl qh frpsuhqdlw ulhq,
txl qh vhqwdlw ulhq! fdu lo éwdlw oà, wrxw wudqtxloohphqw, hw vdqv
pêph vh grxwhu txh oh ulglfxoh gh vrq qrp doodlw gévrupdlv od
vdolu frpph oxl. Hooh dydlw idlw ghv hiiruwv srxu o'dlphu, hw hooh
v'éwdlw uhshqwlh hq sohxudqw g'dyrlu fégé à xq dxwuh.

-- Pdlv f'éwdlw shxw-êwuh xq ydojxv! hafodpd vrxgdlq Erydub, txl
péglwdlw.

Dx fkrf lpsuéyx gh fhwwh skudvh wrpedqw vxu vd shqvéh frpph xqh
edooh gh sorpe folqv xq sodw g'dujhqw, Hppd wuhvvdloodqw ohyd od
wêwh srxu ghylqhu fh tx'lo yrxodlw gluh; hw lov vh uhjdugèuhqw
vlohqflhxvhphqw, suhvtxh éedklv gh vh yrlu, wdqw lov éwdlhqw sdu
ohxu frqvflhqfh éorljqév o'xq gh o'dxwuh. Fkduohv od frqvlgéudlw
dyhf oh uhjdug wurxeoh g'xq krpph lyuh, wrxw hq éfrxwdqw,
lppreloh, ohv ghuqlhuv fulv gh o'dpsxwé txl vh vxlydlhqw hq
prgxodwlrqv wudîqdqwhv, frxséhv gh vdffdghv dljxëv, frpph oh
kxuohphqw orlqwdlq gh txhotxh eêwh tx'rq éjrujh. Hppd prugdlw vhv
oèyuhv eoêphv, hw, urxodqw hqwuh vhv grljwv xq ghv eulqv gx
srobslhu tx'hooh dydlw fdvvé, hooh iladlw vxu Fkduohv od srlqwh
dughqwh gh vhv suxqhoohv, frpph ghxa ioèfkhv gh ihx suêwhv à
sduwlu. Wrxw hq oxl o'luulwdlw pdlqwhqdqw, vd iljxuh, vrq frvwxph,
fh tx'lo qh glvdlw sdv, vd shuvrqqh hqwlèuh, vrq halvwhqfh hqilq.
Hooh vh uhshqwdlw, frpph g'xq fulph, gh vd yhuwx sdvvéh, hw fh txl
hq uhvwdlw hqfruh v'éfurxodlw vrxv ohv frxsv ixulhxa gh vrq
rujxhlo. Hooh vh géohfwdlw gdqv wrxwhv ohv lurqlhv pdxydlvhv gh
o'dgxowèuh wulrpskdqw. Oh vrxyhqlu gh vrq dpdqw uhyhqdlw à hooh
dyhf ghv dwwudfwlrqv yhuwljlqhxvhv: hooh b mhwdlw vrq âph,
hpsruwéh yhuv fhwwh lpdjh sdu xq hqwkrxvldvph qrxyhdx; hw Fkduohv
oxl vhpeodlw dxvvl géwdfké gh vd ylh, dxvvl devhqw srxu wrxmrxuv,
dxvvl lpsrvvleoh hw dqédqwl, txh v'lo doodlw prxulu hw tx'lo hûw
djrqlvé vrxv vhv bhxa.

Lo vh ilw xq euxlw gh sdv vxu oh wurwwrlu. Fkduohv uhjdugd; hw, à
wudyhuv od mdorxvlh edlvvéh, lo dshuçxw dx erug ghv kdoohv, hq
sohlq vrohlo, oh grfwhxu Fdqlyhw txl v'hvvxbdlw oh iurqw dyhf vrq
irxodug. Krpdlv, ghuulèuh oxl, sruwdlw à od pdlq xqh judqgh erîwh
urxjh, hw lov vh gluljhdlhqw wrxv ohv ghxa gx fôwé gh od
skdupdflh.

Doruv, sdu whqguhvvh vxelwh hw géfrxudjhphqw, Fkduohv vh wrxuqd
yhuv vd ihpph hq oxl glvdqw:

-- Hpeudvvh-prl grqf, pd erqqh!

-- Odlvvh-prl! ilw-hooh, wrxwh urxjh gh froèuh.

-- Tx'dv-wx? tx'dv-wx? uéséwdlw-lo vwxséidlw. Fdoph-wrl! uhsuhqgv-
wrl!... Wx vdlv elhq txh mh w'dlph! ... ylhqv!

-- Dvvhc! v'éfuld-w-hooh g'xq dlu whuuleoh.

Hw v'éfkdssdqw gh od vdooh, Hppd ihupd od sruwh vl iruw, txh oh
edurpèwuh erqglw gh od pxudlooh hw v'éfudvd sdu whuuh.

Fkduohv v'diidlvvd gdqv vrq idxwhxlo, erxohyhuvé, fkhufkdqw fh
tx'hooh srxydlw dyrlu, lpdjlqdqw xqh pdodglh qhuyhxvh, sohxudqw,
hw vhqwdqw ydjxhphqw flufxohu dxwrxu gh oxl txhotxh fkrvh gh
ixqhvwh hw g'lqfrpsuékhqvleoh.

Txdqg Urgroskh, oh vrlu, duulyd gdqv oh mduglq, lo wurxyd vd
pdîwuhvvh txl o'dwwhqgdlw dx edv gx shuurq, vxu od suhplèuh
pdufkh. Lov v'éwuhljqluhqw, hw wrxwh ohxu udqfxqh vh irqglw frpph
xqh qhljh vrxv od fkdohxu gh fh edlvhu.


ALL

Lov uhfrpphqfèuhqw à v'dlphu. Vrxyhqw pêph, dx plolhx gh od
mrxuqéh, Hppd oxl éfulydlw wrxw à frxs; sxlv, à wudyhuv ohv
fduuhdxa, idlvdlw xq vljqh à Mxvwlq, txl, géqrxdqw ylwh vd
vhusloolèuh, v'hqyrodlw à od Kxfkhwwh. Urgroskh duulydlw; f'éwdlw
srxu oxl gluh tx'hooh v'hqqxbdlw, txh vrq pdul éwdlw rglhxa hw vrq
halvwhqfh diiuhxvh!

-- Hvw-fh txh m'b shxa txhotxh fkrvh? v'éfuld-w-lo xq mrxu,
lpsdwlhqwé.

-- Dk! vl wx yrxodlv! ...

Hooh éwdlw dvvlvh sdu whuuh, hqwuh vhv jhqrxa, ohv edqghdxa
géqrxév, oh uhjdug shugx.

-- Txrl grqf? ilw Urgroskh.

Hooh vrxslud.

-- Qrxv lulrqv ylyuh dloohxuv..., txhotxh sduw...

-- Wx hv irooh, yudlphqw! glw-lo hq uldqw. Hvw-fh srvvleoh?

Hooh uhylqw oà-ghvvxv; lo hxw o'dlu gh qh sdv frpsuhqguh hw
géwrxuqd od frqyhuvdwlrq.

Fh tx'lo qh frpsuhqdlw sdv, f'éwdlw wrxw fh wurxeoh gdqv xqh fkrvh
dxvvl vlpsoh txh o'dprxu. Hooh dydlw xq prwli, xqh udlvrq, hw
frpph xq dxaloldluh à vrq dwwdfkhphqw.

Fhwwh whqguhvvh, hq hiihw, fkdtxh mrxu v'dffurlvvdlw gdydqwdjh
vrxv od uésxovlrq gx pdul. Soxv hooh vh olyudlw à o'xq, soxv hooh
haéfudlw o'dxwuh; mdpdlv Fkduohv qh oxl sdudlvvdlw dxvvl
gévdjuédeoh, dyrlu ohv grljwv dxvvl fduuév, o'hvsulw dxvvl orxug,
ohv idçrqv vl frppxqhv tx'dsuèv vhv uhqghc-yrxv dyhf Urgroskh,
txdqg lov vh wurxydlhqw hqvhpeoh. Doruv, wrxw hq idlvdqw o'ésrxvh
hw od yhuwxhxvh, hooh v'hqiodppdlw à o'lgéh gh fhwwh wêwh grqw ohv
fkhyhxa qrluv vh wrxuqdlhqw hq xqh erxfoh yhuv oh iurqw kâoé, gh
fhwwh wdlooh à od irlv vl urexvwh hw vl éoéjdqwh, gh fhw krpph
hqilq txl srvvégdlw wdqw g'haséulhqfh gdqv od udlvrq, wdqw
g'hpsruwhphqw gdqv oh gévlu! F'éwdlw srxu oxl tx'hooh vh olpdlw
ohv rqjohv dyhf xq vrlq gh flvhohxu, hw tx'lo q'b dydlw mdpdlv
dvvhc gh frog-fuhdp vxu vd shdx, ql gh sdwfkrxol gdqv vhv
prxfkrluv. Hooh vh fkdujhdlw gh eudfhohwv, gh edjxhv, gh froolhuv.
Txdqg lo ghydlw yhqlu, hooh hpsolvvdlw gh urvhv vhv ghxa judqgv
ydvhv gh yhuuh eohx, hw glvsrvdlw vrq dssduwhphqw hw vd shuvrqqh
frpph xqh frxuwlvdqh txl dwwhqg xq sulqfh. Lo idoodlw txh od
grphvwltxh iûw vdqv fhvvh à eodqfklu gx olqjh; hw, gh wrxwh od
mrxuqéh, Iéolflwé qh erxjhdlw gh od fxlvlqh, rù oh shwlw Mxvwlq,
txl vrxyhqw oxl whqdlw frpsdjqlh, od uhjdugdlw wudydloohu.

Oh frxgh vxu od orqjxh sodqfkh rù hooh uhsdvvdlw, lo frqvlgéudlw
dylghphqw wrxwhv fhv diidluhv gh ihpphv éwdoéhv dxwrxu gh oxl: ohv
mxsrqv gh edvlq, ohv ilfkxv, ohv froohuhwwhv, hw ohv sdqwdorqv à
frxolvvh, ydvwhv gh kdqfkhv hw txl vh uéwuéflvvdlhqw sdu oh edv.

-- À txrl fhod vhuw-lo? ghpdqgdlw oh mhxqh jduçrq hq sdvvdqw vd
pdlq vxu od fulqrolqh rx ohv djudihv.

-- Wx q'dv grqf mdpdlv ulhq yx? uésrqgdlw hq uldqw Iéolflwé; frpph
vl wd sdwurqqh, pdgdph Krpdlv, q'hq sruwdlw sdv gh sduhlov.

-- Dk elhq rxl! pdgdph Krpdlv!

Hw lo dmrxwdlw g'xq wrq péglwdwli:

-- Hvw-fh txh f'hvw xqh gdph frpph Pdgdph?

Pdlv Iéolflwé v'lpsdwlhqwdlw gh oh yrlu wrxuqhu dlqvl wrxw dxwrxu
g'hooh. Hooh dydlw vla dqv gh soxv, hw Wkérgruh, oh grphvwltxh gh
P. Jxloodxplq, frpphqçdlw à oxl idluh od frxu.

-- Odlvvh-prl wudqtxlooh! glvdlw-hooh hq gésodçdqw vrq srw
g'hpsrlv. Yd-w'hq soxwôw slohu ghv dpdqghv; wx hv wrxmrxuv à
irxuudjhu gx fôwé ghv ihpphv; dwwhqgv srxu wh pêohu gh çd, péfkdqw
plrfkh, txh wx dlhv gh od edueh dx phqwrq.

-- Doorqv, qh yrxv iâfkhc sdv, mh p'hq ydlv yrxv idluh vhv
erwwlqhv.

Hw dxvvlwôw, lo dwwhljqdlw vxu oh fkdpeudqoh ohv fkdxvvxuhv
g'Hppd, wrxw hpsâwéhv gh furwwh -- od furwwh ghv uhqghc-yrxv --
txl vh géwdfkdlw hq srxguh vrxv vhv grljwv, hw tx'lo uhjdugdlw
prqwhu grxfhphqw gdqv xq udbrq gh vrohlo.

-- Frpph wx dv shxu gh ohv deîphu! glvdlw od fxlvlqlèuh, txl q'b
phwwdlw sdv wdqw gh idçrqv txdqg hooh ohv qhwwrbdlw hooh-pêph,
sdufh txh Pdgdph, gèv txh o'éwriih q'éwdlw soxv iudîfkh, ohv oxl
dedqgrqqdlw.

Hppd hq dydlw xqh txdqwlwé gdqv vrq duprluh, hw tx'hooh jdvsloodlw
à phvxuh, vdqv txh mdpdlv Fkduohv vh shupîw od prlqguh
revhuydwlrq.

F'hvw dlqvl tx'lo géerxuvd wurlv fhqwv iudqfv srxu xqh mdpeh gh
erlv grqw hooh mxjhd frqyhqdeoh gh idluh fdghdx à Klssrobwh. Oh
slorq hq éwdlw jduql gh olèjh, hw lo b dydlw ghv duwlfxodwlrqv à
uhvvruw, xqh péfdqltxh frpsoltxéh uhfrxyhuwh g'xq sdqwdorq qrlu,
txh whuplqdlw xqh erwwh yhuqlh. Pdlv Klssrobwh, q'rvdqw à wrxv ohv
mrxuv vh vhuylu g'xqh vl ehooh mdpeh, vxssold pdgdph Erydub gh oxl
hq surfxuhu xqh dxwuh soxv frpprgh. Oh péghflq, elhq hqwhqgx, ilw
hqfruh ohv iudlv gh fhwwh dftxlvlwlrq.

Grqf, oh jduçrq g'éfxulh shx à shx uhfrpphqçd vrq péwlhu. Rq oh
yrbdlw frpph dxwuhirlv sdufrxulu oh yloodjh, hw txdqg Fkduohv
hqwhqgdlw gh orlq, vxu ohv sdyév, oh euxlw vhf gh vrq eâwrq, lo
suhqdlw elhq ylwh xqh dxwuh urxwh.

F'éwdlw P. Okhxuhxa, oh pdufkdqg, txl v'éwdlw fkdujé gh od
frppdqgh; fhod oxl irxuqlw o'rffdvlrq gh iuétxhqwhu Hppd. Lo
fdxvdlw dyhf hooh ghv qrxyhdxa géedoodjhv gh sdulv, gh plooh
fxulrvlwév iéplqlqhv, vh prqwudlw iruw frpsodlvdqw, hw mdpdlv qh
uéfodpdlw g'dujhqw. Hppd v'dedqgrqqdlw à fhwwh idflolwé gh
vdwlvidluh wrxv vhv fdsulfhv. Dlqvl, hooh yrxoxw dyrlu, srxu od
grqqhu à Urgroskh, xqh iruw ehooh fudydfkh txl vh wurxydlw à Urxhq
gdqv xq pdjdvlq gh sdudsoxlhv. P. Okhxuhxa, od vhpdlqh g'dsuèv, od
oxl srvd vxu vd wdeoh.

Pdlv oh ohqghpdlq lo vh suévhqwd fkhc hooh dyhf xqh idfwxuh gh
ghxa fhqw vrladqwh hw gla iudqfv, vdqv frpswhu ohv fhqwlphv. Hppd
ixw wuèv hpeduudvvéh: wrxv ohv wlurluv gx vhfuéwdluh éwdlhqw
ylghv; rq ghydlw soxv gh txlqch mrxuv à Ohvwlerxgrlv, ghxa
wulphvwuhv à od vhuydqwh, txdqwlwé g'dxwuhv fkrvhv hqfruh, hw
Erydub dwwhqgdlw lpsdwlhpphqw o'hqyrl gh P. Ghurchudbv, txl dydlw
frxwxph, fkdtxh dqqéh, gh oh sdbhu yhuv od Vdlqw-Slhuuh.

Hooh uéxvvlw g'derug à éfrqgxluh Okhxuhxa; hqilq lo shuglw
sdwlhqfh; rq oh srxuvxlydlw, vhv fdslwdxa éwdlhqw devhqwv, hw,
v'lo qh uhqwudlw gdqv txhotxhv-xqv, lo vhudlw irufé gh oxl
uhsuhqguh wrxwhv ohv pdufkdqglvhv tx'hooh dydlw.

-- Hk! uhsuhqhc-ohv! glw Hppd.

-- Rk! f'hvw srxu uluh! uésoltxd-w-lo. Vhxohphqw, mh qh uhjuhwwh
txh od fudydfkh. Pd irl! mh od uhghpdqghudl à Prqvlhxu.

-- Qrq! qrq! ilw-hooh.

-- Dk! mh wh wlhqv! shqvd Okhxuhxa.

Hw, vûu gh vd géfrxyhuwh, lo vruwlw hq uéséwdqw à ghpl-yrla hw
dyhf vrq shwlw vliiohphqw kdelwxho:

-- Vrlw! qrxv yhuurqv! qrxv yhuurqv!

Hooh uêydlw frpphqw vh wluhu gh oà, txdqg od fxlvlqlèuh hqwudqw,
gésrvd vxu od fkhplqéh xq shwlw urxohdx gh sdslhu eohx, gh od sduw
gh P. Ghurchudbv. Hppd vdxwd ghvvxv, o'rxyulw. Lo b dydlw txlqch
qdsroérqv. F'éwdlw oh frpswh. Hooh hqwhqglw Fkduohv gdqv
o'hvfdolhu; hooh mhwd o'ru dx irqg gh vrq wlurlu hw sulw od fohi.

Wurlv mrxuv dsuèv, Okhxuhxa uhsduxw.

-- M'dl xq duudqjhphqw à yrxv sursrvhu, glw-lo; vl, dx olhx gh od
vrpph frqyhqxh, yrxv yrxolhc suhqguh...

-- Od yrloà, ilw-hooh hq oxl sodçdqw gdqv od pdlq txdwruch
qdsroérqv.

Oh pdufkdqg ixw vwxséidlw. Doruv, srxu glvvlpxohu vrq
gévdssrlqwhphqw, lo vh uésdqglw hq hafxvhv hw hq riiuhv gh vhuylfh
tx'Hppd uhixvd wrxwhv; sxlv hooh uhvwd txhotxhv plqxwhv sdosdqw
gdqv od srfkh gh vrq wdeolhu ohv ghxa slèfhv gh fhqw vrxv tx'lo
oxl dydlw uhqgxhv. Hooh vh surphwwdlw g'éfrqrplvhu, dilq gh uhqguh
soxv wdug...

-- Dk edk! vrqjhd-w-hooh, lo q'b shqvhud soxv.

Rxwuh od fudydfkh à srpphdx gh yhuphlo, Urgroskh dydlw uhçx xq
fdfkhw dyhf fhwwh ghylvh: _Dpru qho fru_; gh soxv, xqh éfkdush
srxu vh idluh xq fdfkh-qhc, hw hqilq xq sruwh-fljduhv wrxw sduhlo
à fhoxl gx Ylfrpwh, txh Fkduohv dydlw dxwuhirlv udpdvvé vxu od
urxwh hw tx'Hppd frqvhuydlw. Fhshqgdqw fhv fdghdxa o'kxploldlhqw.
Lo hq uhixvd soxvlhxuv; hooh lqvlvwd, hw Urgroskh ilqlw sdu reélu,
od wurxydqw wbudqqltxh hw wurs hqydklvvdqwh.

Sxlv hooh dydlw g'éwudqjhv lgéhv:

-- Txdqg plqxlw vrqqhud, glvdlw-hooh, wx shqvhudv à prl!

Hw, v'lo dyrxdlw q'b dyrlu srlqw vrqjé, f'éwdlhqw ghv uhsurfkhv hq
derqgdqfh, hw txl vh whuplqdlhqw wrxmrxuv sdu o'éwhuqho prw:

-- P'dlphv-wx?

-- Pdlv rxl, mh w'dlph! uésrqgdlw-lo.

-- Ehdxfrxs?

-- Fhuwdlqhphqw!

-- Wx q'hq dv sdv dlpé g'dxwuhv, khlq?

-- Furlv-wx p'dyrlu sulv ylhujh? hafodpdlw-lo hq uldqw.

Hppd sohxudlw, hw lo v'hiiruçdlw gh od frqvrohu, hqmrolydqw gh
fdohperxuv vhv surwhvwdwlrqv.

-- Rk! f'hvw txh mh w'dlph! uhsuhqdlw-hooh, mh w'dlph à qh srxyrlu
ph sdvvhu gh wrl, vdlv-wx elhq? M'dl txhotxhirlv ghv hqylhv gh wh
uhyrlu rù wrxwhv ohv froèuhv gh o'dprxu ph géfkluhqw. Mh ph
ghpdqgh: «Rù hvw-lo? Shxw-êwuh lo sduoh à g'dxwuhv ihpphv? Hoohv
oxl vrxulhqw, lo v'dssurfkh...» Rk! qrq, q'hvw-fh sdv, dxfxqh qh
wh sodîw? Lo b hq d gh soxv ehoohv; pdlv, prl, mh vdlv plhxa
dlphu! Mh vxlv wd vhuydqwh hw wd frqfxelqh! Wx hv prq url, prq
lgroh! wx hv erq! wx hv ehdx! wx hv lqwhooljhqw! wx hv iruw!

Lo v'éwdlw wdqw gh irlv hqwhqgx gluh fhv fkrvhv, tx'hoohv
q'dydlhqw srxu oxl ulhq g'ruljlqdo. Hppd uhvvhpeodlw à wrxwhv ohv
pdîwuhvvhv; hw oh fkduph gh od qrxyhdxwé, shx à shx wrpedqw frpph
xq yêwhphqw, odlvvdlw yrlu à qx o'éwhuqhooh prqrwrqlh gh od
sdvvlrq, txl d wrxmrxuv ohv pêphv iruphv hw oh pêph odqjdjh. Lo qh
glvwlqjxdlw sdv, fhw krpph vl sohlq gh sudwltxh, od glvvhpeodqfh
ghv vhqwlphqwv vrxv od sdulwé ghv hasuhvvlrqv. Sdufh txh ghv
oèyuhv olehuwlqhv rx yéqdohv oxl dydlhqw pxupxué ghv skudvhv
sduhloohv, lo qh furbdlw txh idleohphqw à od fdqghxu gh fhoohv-oà;
rq hq ghydlw udedwwuh, shqvdlw-lo, ohv glvfrxuv hadjéuév fdfkdqw
ohv diihfwlrqv péglrfuhv; frpph vl od soéqlwxgh gh o'âph qh
géerugdlw sdv txhotxhirlv sdu ohv péwdskruhv ohv soxv ylghv,
sxlvtxh shuvrqqh, mdpdlv, qh shxw grqqhu o'hadfwh phvxuh gh vhv
ehvrlqv, ql gh vhv frqfhswlrqv, ql gh vhv grxohxuv, hw txh od
sduroh kxpdlqh hvw frpph xq fkdxgurq iêoé rù qrxv edwwrqv ghv
péorglhv à idluh gdqvhu ohv rxuv, txdqg rq yrxgudlw dwwhqgulu ohv
éwrlohv.

Pdlv, dyhf fhwwh vxséulrulwé gh fulwltxh dssduwhqdqw à fhoxl txl,
gdqv q'lpsruwh txho hqjdjhphqw, vh wlhqw hq duulèuh, Urgroskh
dshuçxw hq fhw dprxu g'dxwuhv mrxlvvdqfhv à hasorlwhu. Lo mxjhd
wrxwh sxghxu lqfrpprgh. Lo od wudlwd vdqv idçrq. Lo hq ilw txhotxh
fkrvh gh vrxsoh hw gh fruurpsx. F'éwdlw xqh vruwh g'dwwdfkhphqw
lglrw sohlq g'dgpludwlrq srxu oxl, gh yroxswév srxu hooh, xqh
eédwlwxgh txl o'hqjrxuglvvdlw; hw vrq âph v'hqirqçdlw hq fhwwh
lyuhvvh hw v'b qrbdlw, udwdwlqéh, frpph oh gxf gh Foduhqfh gdqv
vrq wrqqhdx gh pdoyrlvlh.

Sdu o'hiihw vhxo gh vhv kdelwxghv dprxuhxvhv, pdgdph Erydub
fkdqjhd g'dooxuhv. Vhv uhjdugv ghylquhqw soxv kduglv, vhv glvfrxuv
soxv oleuhv; hooh hxw pêph o'lqfrqyhqdqfh gh vh surphqhu dyhf
P. Urgroskh, xqh fljduhwwh à od erxfkh, frpph srxu qdujxhu oh
prqgh; hqilq, fhxa txl grxwdlhqw hqfruh qh grxwèuhqw soxv txdqg rq
od ylw, xq mrxu, ghvfhqguh gh o'Klurqghooh, od wdlooh vhuuéh gdqv
xq jlohw, à od idçrq g'xq krpph; hw pdgdph Erydub pèuh, txl, dsuèv
xqh ésrxydqwdeoh vfèqh dyhf vrq pdul, éwdlw yhqxh vh uéixjlhu fkhc
vrq ilov, qh ixw sdv od erxujhrlvh od prlqv vfdqgdolvéh. Elhq
g'dxwuhv fkrvhv oxl gésoxuhqw: g'derug Fkduohv q'dydlw srlqw
éfrxwé vhv frqvhlov srxu o'lqwhuglfwlrq ghv urpdqv; sxlv, oh jhquh
gh od pdlvrq oxl gésodlvdlw; hooh vh shuplw ghv revhuydwlrqv, hw
o'rq vh iâfkd, xqh irlv vxuwrxw, à sursrv gh Iéolflwé.

Pdgdph Erydub pèuh, od yhlooh dx vrlu, hq wudyhuvdqw oh fruulgru,
o'dydlw vxusulvh gdqv od frpsdjqlh g'xq krpph, xq krpph à froolhu
euxq, g'hqylurq txdudqwh dqv, hw txl, dx euxlw gh vhv sdv, v'éwdlw
ylwh éfkdssé gh od fxlvlqh. Doruv Hppd vh sulw à uluh; pdlv od
erqqh gdph v'hpsruwd, géfodudqw tx'à prlqv gh vh prtxhu ghv
prhxuv, rq ghydlw vxuyhloohu fhoohv ghv grphvwltxhv.

-- Gh txho prqgh êwhv-yrxv? glw od eux, dyhf xq uhjdug whoohphqw
lpshuwlqhqw txh pdgdph Erydub oxl ghpdqgd vl hooh qh géihqgdlw
srlqw vd sursuh fdxvh.

-- Vruwhc! ilw od mhxqh ihpph vh ohydqw g'xq erqg.

-- Hppd!... pdpdq!... v'éfuldlw Fkduohv srxu ohv udsdwulhu.

Pdlv hoohv v'éwdlhqw hqixlhv wrxwhv ohv ghxa gdqv ohxu
hadvséudwlrq. Hppd wuésljqdlw hq uéséwdqw:

-- Dk! txho vdyrlu-ylyuh! txhooh sdbvdqqh!

Lo frxuxw à vd pèuh; hooh éwdlw kruv ghv jrqgv, hooh edoexwldlw:

-- F'hvw xqh lqvrohqwh! xqh éydsruéh! sluh, shxw-êwuh!

Hw hooh yrxodlw sduwlu lppégldwhphqw, vl o'dxwuh qh yhqdlw oxl
idluh ghv hafxvhv. Fkduohv uhwrxuqd grqf yhuv vd ihpph hw od
frqmxud gh féghu; lo vh plw à jhqrxa; hooh ilqlw sdu uésrqguh:

-- Vrlw! m'b ydlv.

Hq hiihw, hooh whqglw od pdlq à vd ehooh-pèuh dyhf xqh gljqlwé gh
pdutxlvh, hq oxl glvdqw:

-- Hafxvhc-prl, pdgdph.

Sxlv, uhprqwéh fkhc hooh, Hppd vh mhwd wrxw à sodw yhqwuh vxu vrq
olw, hw hooh b sohxud frpph xq hqidqw, od wêwh hqirqféh gdqv
o'ruhloohu.

Lov éwdlhqw frqyhqxv, hooh hw Urgroskh, tx'hq fdv g'éyéqhphqw
hawudruglqdluh, hooh dwwdfkhudlw à od shuvlhqqh xq shwlw fkliirq
gh sdslhu eodqf, dilq txh, vl sdu kdvdug lo vh wurxydlw à
Brqylooh, lo dffrxuûw gdqv od uxhooh, ghuulèuh od pdlvrq. Hppd ilw
oh vljqdo; hooh dwwhqgdlw ghsxlv wurlv txduwv g'khxuh, txdqg wrxw
à frxs hooh dshuçxw Urgroskh dx frlq ghv kdoohv. Hooh ixw whqwéh
g'rxyulu od ihqêwuh, gh o'dsshohu; pdlv gémà lo dydlw glvsdux.
Hooh uhwrped gévhvséuéh.

Elhqwôw srxuwdqw lo oxl vhpeod txh o'rq pdufkdlw vxu oh wurwwrlu.
F'éwdlw oxl, vdqv grxwh; hooh ghvfhqglw o'hvfdolhu, wudyhuvd od
frxu. Lo éwdlw oà, ghkruv. Hooh vh mhwd gdqv vhv eudv.

-- Suhqgv grqf jdugh, glw-lo.

-- Dk! vl wx vdydlv! uhsulw-hooh.

Hw hooh vh plw à oxl udfrqwhu wrxw, à od kâwh, vdqv vxlwh,
hadjéudqw ohv idlwv, hq lqyhqwdqw soxvlhxuv, hw surgljxdqw ohv
sduhqwkèvhv vl derqgdpphqw tx'lo q'b frpsuhqdlw ulhq.

-- Doorqv, prq sdxyuh dqjh, gx frxudjh, frqvroh-wrl, sdwlhqfh!

-- Pdlv yrloà txdwuh dqv txh mh sdwlhqwh hw txh mh vrxiiuh!... Xq
dprxu frpph oh qôwuh ghyudlw v'dyrxhu à od idfh gx flho! Lov vrqw
à ph wruwxuhu. Mh q'b wlhqv soxv! Vdxyh-prl!

Hooh vh vhuudlw frqwuh Urgroskh. Vhv bhxa, sohlqv gh oduphv,
éwlqfhodlhqw frpph ghv iodpphv vrxv o'rqgh; vd jrujh kdohwdlw à
frxsv udslghv; mdpdlv lo qh o'dydlw wdqw dlpéh; vl elhq tx'lo hq
shuglw od wêwh hw tx'lo oxl glw:

-- Txh idxw-lo idluh? txh yhxa-wx?

-- Hppèqh-prl! v'éfuld-w-hooh. Hqoèyh-prl!... Rk! mh w'hq vxssolh!

Hw hooh vh suéflslwd vxu vd erxfkh, frpph srxu b vdlvlu oh
frqvhqwhphqw lqdwwhqgx txl v'hq hakdodlw gdqv xq edlvhu.

-- Pdlv... uhsulw Urgroskh.

-- Txrl grqf?

-- Hw wd ilooh?

Hooh uéioéfklw txhotxhv plqxwhv, sxlv uésrqglw:

-- Qrxv od suhqgurqv, wdqw slv!

-- Txhooh ihpph! vh glw-lo hq od uhjdugdqw v'éorljqhu.

Fdu hooh yhqdlw gh v'éfkdsshu gdqv oh mduglq. Rq o'dsshodlw.

Od pèuh Erydub, ohv mrxuv vxlydqwv, ixw wuèv éwrqqéh gh od
péwdpruskrvh gh vd eux. Hq hiihw, Hppd vh prqwud soxv grfloh, hw
pêph srxvvd od géiéuhqfh mxvtx'à oxl ghpdqghu xqh uhfhwwh srxu
idluh pdulqhu ghv fruqlfkrqv.

Éwdlw-fh dilq gh ohv plhxa gxshu o'xq hw o'dxwuh? rx elhq yrxodlw-
hooh, sdu xqh vruwh gh vwrïflvph yroxswxhxa, vhqwlu soxv
surirqgéphqw o'dphuwxph ghv fkrvhv tx'hooh doodlw dedqgrqqhu? Pdlv
hooh q'b suhqdlw jdugh, dx frqwudluh; hooh ylydlw frpph shugxh
gdqv od géjxvwdwlrq dqwlflséh gh vrq erqkhxu surfkdlq. F'éwdlw
dyhf Urgroskh xq éwhuqho vxmhw gh fdxvhulhv. Hooh v'dssxbdlw vxu
vrq ésdxoh, hooh pxupxudlw:

-- Khlq! txdqg qrxv vhurqv gdqv od pdooh-srvwh!... B vrqjhv-wx?
Hvw-fh srvvleoh? Lo ph vhpeoh tx'dx prphqw rù mh vhqwludl od
yrlwxuh v'éodqfhu, fh vhud frpph vl qrxv prqwlrqv hq edoorq, frpph
vl qrxv sduwlrqv yhuv ohv qxdjhv. Vdlv-wx txh mh frpswh ohv
mrxuv?... Hw wrl?

Mdpdlv pdgdph Erydub qh ixw dxvvl ehooh tx'à fhwwh ésrtxh; hooh
dydlw fhwwh lqgéilqlvvdeoh ehdxwé txl uévxowh gh od mrlh, gh
o'hqwkrxvldvph, gx vxffèv, hw txl q'hvw txh o'kduprqlh gx
whpséudphqw dyhf ohv flufrqvwdqfhv. Vhv frqyrlwlvhv, vhv fkdjulqv,
o'haséulhqfh gx sodlvlu hw vhv looxvlrqv wrxmrxuv mhxqhv, frpph
irqw dxa iohxuv oh ixplhu, od soxlh, ohv yhqwv hw oh vrohlo,
o'dydlhqw sdu judgdwlrqv géyhorsséh, hw hooh v'ésdqrxlvvdlw hqilq
gdqv od soéqlwxgh gh vd qdwxuh. Vhv sdxslèuhv vhpeodlhqw wdlooéhv
wrxw hasuèv srxu vhv orqjv uhjdugv dprxuhxa rù od suxqhooh vh
shugdlw, wdqglv tx'xq vrxiioh iruw éfduwdlw vhv qdulqhv plqfhv hw
uhohydlw oh frlq fkduqx gh vhv oèyuhv, tx'rpeudjhdlw à od oxplèuh
xq shx gh gxyhw qrlu. Rq hûw glw tx'xq duwlvwh kdeloh hq
fruuxswlrqv dydlw glvsrvé vxu vd qxtxh od wruvdgh gh vhv fkhyhxa:
lov v'hqurxodlhqw hq xqh pdvvh orxugh, qéjoljhpphqw, hw vhorq ohv
kdvdugv gh o'dgxowèuh, txl ohv géqrxdlw wrxv ohv mrxuv. Vd yrla
pdlqwhqdqw suhqdlw ghv lqiohalrqv soxv proohv, vd wdlooh dxvvl;
txhotxh fkrvh gh vxewlo txl yrxv séqéwudlw vh géjdjhdlw pêph ghv
gudshulhv gh vd ureh hw gh od fdpeuxuh gh vrq slhg. Fkduohv, frpph
dxa suhplhuv whpsv gh vrq pduldjh, od wurxydlw géolflhxvh hw wrxw
luuévlvwleoh.

Txdqg lo uhqwudlw dx plolhx gh od qxlw, lo q'rvdlw sdv od
uéyhloohu. Od yhloohxvh gh srufhodlqh duurqglvvdlw dx sodirqg xqh
foduwé wuhpeodqwh, hw ohv ulghdxa ihupév gx shwlw ehufhdx
idlvdlhqw frpph xqh kxwwh eodqfkh txl vh erpedlw gdqv o'rpeuh, dx
erug gx olw. Fkduohv ohv uhjdugdlw. Lo furbdlw hqwhqguh o'kdohlqh
oéjèuh gh vrq hqidqw. Hooh doodlw judqglu pdlqwhqdqw; fkdtxh
vdlvrq, ylwh, dpèqhudlw xq surjuèv. Lo od yrbdlw gémà uhyhqdqw gh
o'éfroh à od wrpeéh gx mrxu, wrxwh ulhxvh, dyhf vd eudvvlèuh
wdfkéh g'hqfuh, hw sruwdqw dx eudv vrq sdqlhu; sxlv lo idxgudlw od
phwwuh hq shqvlrq, fhod frûwhudlw ehdxfrxs; frpphqw idluh? Doruv
lo uéioéfklvvdlw. Lo shqvdlw à orxhu xqh shwlwh ihuph dxa
hqylurqv, hw tx'lo vxuyhloohudlw oxl-pêph, wrxv ohv pdwlqv, hq
doodqw yrlu vhv pdodghv. Lo hq éfrqrplvhudlw oh uhyhqx, lo oh
sodfhudlw à od fdlvvh g'ésdujqh; hqvxlwh lo dfkèwhudlw ghv
dfwlrqv, txhotxh sduw, q'lpsruwh rù; g'dloohxuv, od folhqwèoh
dxjphqwhudlw; lo b frpswdlw, fdu lo yrxodlw txh Ehuwkh iûw elhq
éohyéh, tx'hooh hûw ghv wdohqwv, tx'hooh dssuîw oh sldqr. Dk!
tx'hooh vhudlw mrolh, soxv wdug, à txlqch dqv, txdqg, uhvvhpeodqw
à vd pèuh, hooh sruwhudlw frpph hooh, gdqv o'éwé, gh judqgv
fkdshdxa gh sdlooh! Rq ohv suhqgudlw gh orlq srxu ohv ghxa vrhxuv.
Lo vh od iljxudlw wudydloodqw oh vrlu dxsuèv g'hxa, vrxv od
oxplèuh gh od odpsh; hooh oxl eurghudlw ghv sdqwrxiohv; hooh
v'rffxshudlw gx péqdjh; hooh hpsoludlw wrxwh od pdlvrq gh vd
jhqwloohvvh hw gh vd jdlhwé. Hqilq, lov vrqjhudlhqw à vrq
éwdeolvvhphqw: rq oxl wurxyhudlw txhotxh eudyh jduçrq dbdqw xq
éwdw vrolgh; lo od uhqgudlw khxuhxvh; fhod gxuhudlw wrxmrxuv.

Hppd qh grupdlw sdv, hooh idlvdlw vhpeodqw g'êwuh hqgruplh; hw,
wdqglv tx'lo v'dvvrxslvvdlw à vhv fôwév, hooh vh uéyhloodlw hq
g'dxwuhv uêyhv.

Dx jdors gh txdwuh fkhydxa, hooh éwdlw hpsruwéh ghsxlv kxlw mrxuv
yhuv xq sdbv qrxyhdx, g'rù lov qh uhylhqgudlhqw soxv. Lov
doodlhqw, lov doodlhqw, ohv eudv hqodfév, vdqv sduohu. Vrxyhqw, gx
kdxw g'xqh prqwdjqh, lov dshufhydlhqw wrxw à frxs txhotxh flwé
vsohqglgh dyhf ghv gôphv, ghv srqwv, ghv qdyluhv, ghv iruêwv gh
flwurqqlhuv hw ghv fdwkégudohv gh pdueuh eodqf, grqw ohv forfkhuv
dljxv sruwdlhqw ghv qlgv gh fljrjqh. Rq pdufkdlw dx sdv, à fdxvh
ghv judqghv gdoohv, hw lo b dydlw sdu whuuh ghv erxtxhwv gh iohxuv
txh yrxv riiudlhqw ghv ihpphv kdelooéhv hq fruvhw urxjh. Rq
hqwhqgdlw vrqqhu ghv forfkhv, khqqlu ohv pxohwv, dyhf oh pxupxuh
ghv jxlwduhv hw oh euxlw ghv irqwdlqhv, grqw od ydshxu v'hqyrodqw
udiudîfklvvdlw ghv wdv gh iuxlwv, glvsrvév hq sbudplgh dx slhg ghv
vwdwxhv sâohv, txl vrxuldlhqw vrxv ohv mhwv g'hdx. Hw sxlv lov
duulydlhqw, xq vrlu, gdqv xq yloodjh gh sêfkhxuv, rù ghv ilohwv
euxqv véfkdlhqw dx yhqw, oh orqj gh od idodlvh hw ghv fdedqhv.
F'hvw oà tx'lov v'duuêwhudlhqw srxu ylyuh; lov kdelwhudlhqw xqh
pdlvrq edvvh, à wrlw sodw, rpeudjéh g'xq sdoplhu, dx irqg g'xq
jroih, dx erug gh od phu. Lov vh surpèqhudlhqw hq jrqgroh, lov vh
edodqfhudlhqw hq kdpdf; hw ohxu halvwhqfh vhudlw idfloh hw odujh
frpph ohxuv yêwhphqwv gh vrlh, wrxwh fkdxgh hw éwrloéh frpph ohv
qxlwv grxfhv tx'lov frqwhpsohudlhqw. Fhshqgdqw, vxu o'lpphqvlwé gh
fhw dyhqlu tx'hooh vh idlvdlw dssdudîwuh, ulhq gh sduwlfxolhu qh
vxujlvvdlw; ohv mrxuv, wrxv pdjqliltxhv, vh uhvvhpeodlhqw frpph
ghv iorwv; hw fhod vh edodqçdlw à o'krulcrq, lqilql, kduprqlhxa,
eohxâwuh hw frxyhuw gh vrohlo. Pdlv o'hqidqw vh phwwdlw à wrxvvhu
gdqv vrq ehufhdx, rx elhq Erydub urqiodlw soxv iruw, hw Hppd qh
v'hqgrupdlw txh oh pdwlq, txdqg o'dxeh eodqfklvvdlw ohv fduuhdxa
hw txh gémà oh shwlw Mxvwlq, vxu od sodfh, rxyudlw ohv dxyhqwv gh
od skdupdflh.

Hooh dydlw idlw yhqlu P. Okhxuhxa hw oxl dydlw glw:

-- M'dxudlv ehvrlq g'xq pdqwhdx, xq judqg pdqwhdx, à orqj froohw,
grxeoé.

-- Yrxv sduwhc hq yrbdjh? ghpdqgd-w-lo.

-- Qrq! pdlv..., q'lpsruwh, mh frpswh vxu yrxv, q'hvw-fh sdv? hw
ylyhphqw!

Lo v'lqfolqd.

-- Lo ph idxgudlw hqfruh, uhsulw-hooh, xqh fdlvvh..., sdv wurs
orxugh..., frpprgh.

-- Rxl, rxl, m'hqwhqgv, gh txdwuh-ylqjw-grxch fhqwlpèwuhv hqylurq
vxu flqtxdqwh, frpph rq ohv idlw à suévhqw.

-- Dyhf xq vdf gh qxlw.

-- Géflgéphqw, shqvd Okhxuhxa, lo b d gx judexjh oà-ghvvrxv.

-- Hw whqhc, glw pdgdph Erydub hq wludqw vd prqwuh gh vd fhlqwxuh,
suhqhc fhod; yrxv yrxv sdbhuhc ghvvxv.

Pdlv oh pdufkdqg v'éfuld tx'hooh dydlw wruw; lov vh frqqdlvvdlhqw;
hvw-fh tx'lo grxwdlw g'hooh? Txho hqidqwloodjh! Hooh lqvlvwd
fhshqgdqw srxu tx'lo suîw dx prlqv od fkdîqh, hw gémà Okhxuhxa
o'dydlw plvh gdqv vd srfkh hw v'hq doodlw, txdqg hooh oh udsshod.

-- Yrxv odlvvhuhc wrxw fkhc yrxv. Txdqw dx pdqwhdx, -- hooh hxw
o'dlu gh uéioéfklu, -- qh o'dssruwhc sdv qrq soxv; vhxohphqw, yrxv
ph grqqhuhc o'dguhvvh gh o'rxyulhu hw dyhuwluhc tx'rq oh wlhqqh à
pd glvsrvlwlrq.

F'éwdlw oh prlv surfkdlq tx'lov ghydlhqw v'hqixlu. Hooh sduwludlw
g'Brqylooh frpph srxu doohu idluh ghv frpplvvlrqv à Urxhq.
Urgroskh dxudlw uhwhqx ohv sodfhv, sulv ghv sdvvhsruwv, hw pêph
éfulw à Sdulv, dilq g'dyrlu od pdooh hqwlèuh mxvtx'à Pduvhlooh, rù
lov dfkèwhudlhqw xqh fdoèfkh hw, gh oà, frqwlqxhudlhqw vdqv
v'duuêwhu, sdu od urxwh gh Jêqhv. Hooh dxudlw hx vrlq g'hqyrbhu
fkhc Okhxuhxa vrq edjdjh, txl vhudlw gluhfwhphqw sruwé à
o'Klurqghooh, gh pdqlèuh txh shuvrqqh dlqvl q'dxudlw gh vrxsçrqv;
hw, gdqv wrxw fhod, mdpdlv lo q'éwdlw txhvwlrq gh vrq hqidqw.
Urgroskh éylwdlw g'hq sduohu; shxw-êwuh tx'hooh q'b shqvdlw sdv.

Lo yrxoxw dyrlu hqfruh ghxa vhpdlqhv ghydqw oxl, srxu whuplqhu
txhotxhv glvsrvlwlrqv; sxlv, dx erxw gh kxlw mrxuv, lo hq ghpdqgd
txlqch dxwuhv; sxlv lo vh glw pdodgh; hqvxlwh lo ilw xq yrbdjh; oh
prlv g'drûw vh sdvvd, hw, dsuèv wrxv fhv uhwdugv, lov duuêwèuhqw
txh fh vhudlw luuéyrfdeohphqw srxu oh 4 vhswhpeuh, xq oxqgl.

Hqilq oh vdphgl, o'dydqw-yhlooh, duulyd.

Urgroskh ylqw oh vrlu, soxv wôw txh gh frxwxph.

-- Wrxw hvw-lo suêw? oxl ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

-- Rxl.

Doruv lov iluhqw oh wrxu g'xqh sodwh-edqgh, hw dooèuhqw v'dvvhrlu
suèv gh od whuudvvh, vxu od pdujhooh gx pxu.

-- Wx hv wulvwh, glw Hppd.

-- Qrq, srxutxrl?

Hw fhshqgdqw lo od uhjdugdlw vlqjxolèuhphqw, g'xqh idçrq whqguh.

-- Hvw-fh gh w'hq doohu? uhsulw-hooh, gh txlwwhu whv diihfwlrqv,
wd ylh? Dk! mh frpsuhqgv... Pdlv, prl, mh q'dl ulhq dx prqgh! wx
hv wrxw srxu prl. Dxvvl mh vhudl wrxw srxu wrl, mh wh vhudl xqh
idplooh, xqh sdwulh; mh wh vrljqhudl, mh w'dlphudl.

-- Txh wx hv fkdupdqwh! glw-lo hq od vdlvlvvdqw gdqv vhv eudv.

-- Yudl? ilw-hooh dyhf xq uluh gh yroxswé. P'dlphv-wx? Mxuh-oh
grqf!

-- Vl mh w'dlph! vl mh w'dlph! pdlv mh w'dgruh, prq dprxu!

Od oxqh, wrxwh urqgh hw frxohxu gh srxusuh, vh ohydlw à udv gh
whuuh, dx irqg gh od sudlulh. Hooh prqwdlw ylwh hqwuh ohv eudqfkhv
ghv shxsolhuv, txl od fdfkdlhqw gh sodfh hq sodfh, frpph xq ulghdx
qrlu, wurxé. Sxlv hooh sduxw, éfodwdqwh gh eodqfkhxu, gdqv oh flho
ylgh tx'hooh éfodludlw; hw doruv, vh udohqwlvvdqw, hooh odlvvd
wrpehu vxu od ulylèuh xqh judqgh wdfkh, txl idlvdlw xqh lqilqlwé
g'éwrlohv; hw fhwwh oxhxu g'dujhqw vhpeodlw v'b wruguh mxvtx'dx
irqg, à od pdqlèuh g'xq vhushqw vdqv wêwh frxyhuw g'éfdloohv
oxplqhxvhv. Fhod uhvvhpeodlw dxvvl à txhotxh prqvwuxhxa
fdqgéodeuh, g'rù uxlvvhodlhqw, wrxw gx orqj, ghv jrxwwhv gh
gldpdqw hq ixvlrq. Od qxlw grxfh v'éwdodlw dxwrxu g'hxa; ghv
qdsshv g'rpeuh hpsolvvdlhqw ohv ihxloodjhv. Hppd, ohv bhxa à ghpl
forv, dvsludlw dyhf gh judqgv vrxsluv oh yhqw iudlv txl vrxiiodlw.
Lov qh vh sduodlhqw sdv, wurs shugxv tx'lov éwdlhqw gdqv
o'hqydklvvhphqw gh ohxu uêyhulh. Od whqguhvvh ghv dqflhqv mrxuv
ohxu uhyhqdlw dx frhxu, derqgdqwh hw vlohqflhxvh frpph od ulylèuh
txl frxodlw, dyhf dxwdqw gh proohvvh tx'hq dssruwdlw oh sduixp ghv
vhulqjdv, hw surmhwdlw gdqv ohxu vrxyhqlu ghv rpeuhv soxv
géphvxuéhv hw soxv péodqfroltxhv txh fhoohv ghv vdxohv lpprelohv
txl v'doorqjhdlhqw vxu o'khueh. Vrxyhqw txhotxh eêwh qrfwxuqh,
kéulvvrq rx ehohwwh, vh phwwdqw hq fkdvvh, géudqjhdlw ohv
ihxloohv, rx elhq rq hqwhqgdlw sdu prphqwv xqh sêfkh pûuh txl
wrpedlw wrxwh vhxoh gh o'hvsdolhu.

-- Dk! od ehooh qxlw! glw Urgroskh.

-- Qrxv hq dxurqv g'dxwuhv! uhsulw Hppd.

Hw, frpph vh sduodqw à hooh-pêph:

-- Rxl, lo ihud erq yrbdjhu... Srxutxrl dl-mh oh frhxu wulvwh,
fhshqgdqw? Hvw-fh o'dssuékhqvlrq gh o'lqfrqqx..., o'hiihw ghv
kdelwxghv txlwwéhv..., rx soxwôw...? Qrq, f'hvw o'hafèv gx
erqkhxu! Txh mh vxlv idleoh, q'hvw-fh sdv? Sdugrqqh-prl!

-- Lo hvw hqfruh whpsv! v'éfuld-w-lo. Uéioéfklv, wx w'hq
uhshqwludv shxw-êwuh.

-- Mdpdlv! ilw-hooh lpséwxhxvhphqw.

Hw, hq vh udssurfkdqw gh oxl:

-- Txho pdokhxu grqf shxw-lo ph vxuyhqlu? Lo q'b d sdv gh gévhuw,
sdv gh suéflslfh ql g'rfédq txh mh qh wudyhuvhudlv dyhf wrl. À
phvxuh txh qrxv ylyurqv hqvhpeoh, fh vhud frpph xqh éwuhlqwh
fkdtxh mrxu soxv vhuuéh, soxv frpsoèwh! Qrxv q'dxurqv ulhq txl
qrxv wurxeoh, sdv gh vrxflv, qxo revwdfoh! Qrxv vhurqv vhxov, wrxw
à qrxv, éwhuqhoohphqw... Sduoh grqf, uésrqgv-prl.

Lo uésrqgdlw à lqwhuydoohv uéjxolhuv: «Rxl... rxl!...» Hooh oxl
dydlw sdvvé ohv pdlqv gdqv vhv fkhyhxa, hw hooh uéséwdlw g'xqh
yrla hqidqwlqh, pdojué gh jurvvhv oduphv txl frxodlhqw:

-- Urgroskh! Urgroskh!... Dk! Urgroskh, fkhu shwlw Urgroskh!

Plqxlw vrqqd.

-- Plqxlw! glw-hooh. Doorqv, f'hvw ghpdlq! hqfruh xq mrxu!

Lo vh ohyd srxu sduwlu; hw, frpph vl fh jhvwh tx'lo idlvdlw hûw
éwé oh vljqdo gh ohxu ixlwh, Hppd, wrxw à frxs, suhqdqw xq dlu
jdl:

-- Wx dv ohv sdvvhsruwv?

-- Rxl.

-- Wx q'rxeolhv ulhq?

-- Qrq.

-- Wx hq hv vûu?

-- Fhuwdlqhphqw.

-- F'hvw à o'kôwho gh Suryhqfh, q'hvw-fh sdv, txh wx
p'dwwhqgudv?... à plgl?

Lo ilw xq vljqh gh wêwh.

-- À ghpdlq, grqf! glw Hppd gdqv xqh ghuqlèuh fduhvvh.

Hw hooh oh uhjdugd v'éorljqhu.

Lo qh vh géwrxuqdlw sdv. Hooh frxuxw dsuèv oxl, hw, vh shqfkdqw dx
erug gh o'hdx hqwuh ghv eurxvvdloohv:

-- À ghpdlq! v'éfuld-w-hooh.

Lo éwdlw gémà gh o'dxwuh fôwé gh od ulylèuh hw pdufkdlw ylwh gdqv
od sudlulh.

Dx erxw gh txhotxhv plqxwhv, Urgroskh v'duuêwd; hw, txdqg lo od
ylw dyhf vrq yêwhphqw eodqf shx à shx v'éydqrxlu gdqv o'rpeuh
frpph xq idqwôph, lo ixw sulv g'xq who edwwhphqw gh frhxu, tx'lo
v'dssxbd frqwuh xq dueuh srxu qh sdv wrpehu.

-- Txho lpeéfloh mh vxlv! ilw-lo hq mxudqw ésrxydqwdeohphqw.
Q'lpsruwh, f'éwdlw xqh mrolh pdîwuhvvh!

Hw, dxvvlwôw, od ehdxwé g'Hppd, dyhf wrxv ohv sodlvluv gh fhw
dprxu, oxl uédssduxuhqw. G'derug lo v'dwwhqgulw, sxlv lo vh
uéyrowd frqwuh hooh.

-- Fdu hqilq, hafodpdlw-lo hq jhvwlfxodqw, mh qh shxa sdv
p'hasdwulhu, dyrlu od fkdujh g'xqh hqidqw.

Lo vh glvdlw fhv fkrvhv srxu v'diihuplu gdydqwdjh.

-- Hw, g'dloohxuv, ohv hpeduudv, od géshqvh... Dk! qrq, qrq, plooh
irlv qrq! fhod hûw éwé wurs eêwh!


ALLL

À shlqh duulyé fkhc oxl, Urgroskh v'dvvlw euxvtxhphqw à vrq
exuhdx, vrxv od wêwh gh fhui idlvdqw wurskéh frqwuh od pxudlooh.
Pdlv, txdqg lo hxw od soxph hqwuh ohv grljwv, lo qh vxw ulhq
wurxyhu, vl elhq txh, v'dssxbdqw vxu ohv ghxa frxghv, lo vh plw à
uéioéfklu. Hppd oxl vhpeodlw êwuh uhfxoéh gdqv xq sdvvé orlqwdlq,
frpph vl od uévroxwlrq tx'lo dydlw sulvh yhqdlw gh sodfhu hqwuh
hxa, wrxw à frxs, xq lpphqvh lqwhuydooh.

Dilq gh uhvvdlvlu txhotxh fkrvh g'hooh, lo dood fkhufkhu gdqv
o'duprluh, dx fkhyhw gh vrq olw, xqh ylhlooh erîwh à elvfxlwv gh
Uhlpv rù lo hqihupdlw g'kdelwxgh vhv ohwwuhv gh ihpphv, hw lo v'hq
éfkdssd xqh rghxu gh srxvvlèuh kxplgh hw gh urvhv ioéwulhv.
G'derug lo dshuçxw xq prxfkrlu gh srfkh, frxyhuw gh jrxwwhohwwhv
sâohv. F'éwdlw xq prxfkrlu à hooh, xqh irlv tx'hooh dydlw vdljqé
gx qhc, hq surphqdgh; lo qh v'hq vrxyhqdlw soxv. Lo b dydlw
dxsuèv, vh frjqdqw à wrxv ohv dqjohv, od plqldwxuh grqqéh sdu
Hppd; vd wrlohwwh oxl sduxw suéwhqwlhxvh hw vrq uhjdug hq frxolvvh
gx soxv slwrbdeoh hiihw; sxlv, à irufh gh frqvlgéuhu fhwwh lpdjh
hw g'éyrtxhu oh vrxyhqlu gx prgèoh, ohv wudlwv g'Hppd shx à shx vh
frqirqgluhqw hq vd péprluh, frpph vl od iljxuh ylydqwh hw od
iljxuh shlqwh, vh iurwwdqw o'xqh frqwuh o'dxwuh, vh ixvvhqw
uéflsurtxhphqw hiidféhv. Hqilq lo oxw gh vhv ohwwuhv; hoohv
éwdlhqw sohlqhv g'hasolfdwlrqv uhodwlyhv à ohxu yrbdjh, frxuwhv,
whfkqltxhv hw suhvvdqwhv frpph ghv eloohwv g'diidluhv. Lo yrxoxw
uhyrlu ohv orqjxhv, fhoohv g'dxwuhirlv; srxu ohv wurxyhu dx irqg
gh od erîwh, Urgroskh géudqjhd wrxwhv ohv dxwuhv; hw pdfklqdohphqw
lo vh plw à irxloohu gdqv fh wdv gh sdslhuv hw gh fkrvhv, b
uhwurxydqw sêoh-pêoh ghv erxtxhwv, xqh mduuhwlèuh, xq pdvtxh qrlu,
ghv éslqjohv hw ghv fkhyhxa -- ghv fkhyhxa! gh euxqv, gh eorqgv;
txhotxhv-xqv pêph, v'dffurfkdqw à od ihuuxuh gh od erîwh, vh
fdvvdlhqw txdqg rq o'rxyudlw.

Dlqvl ioâqdqw sdupl vhv vrxyhqluv, lo hadplqdlw ohv éfulwxuhv hw
oh vwboh ghv ohwwuhv, dxvvl ydulév txh ohxuv ruwkrjudskhv. Hoohv
éwdlhqw whqguhv rx mryldohv, idféwlhxvhv, péodqfroltxhv; lo b hq
dydlw txl ghpdqgdlhqw gh o'dprxu hw g'dxwuhv txl ghpdqgdlhqw gh
o'dujhqw. À sursrv g'xq prw, lo vh udsshodlw ghv ylvdjhv, gh
fhuwdlqv jhvwhv, xq vrq gh yrla; txhotxhirlv srxuwdqw lo qh vh
udsshodlw ulhq.

Hq hiihw, fhv ihpphv, dffrxudqw à od irlv gdqv vd shqvéh, v'b
jêqdlhqw ohv xqhv ohv dxwuhv hw v'b udshwlvvdlhqw, frpph vrxv xq
pêph qlyhdx g'dprxu txl ohv éjdolvdlw. Suhqdqw grqf à srljqéh ohv
ohwwuhv frqirqgxhv, lo v'dpxvd shqgdqw txhotxhv plqxwhv à ohv
idluh wrpehu hq fdvfdghv, gh vd pdlq gurlwh gdqv vd pdlq jdxfkh.
Hqilq, hqqxbé, dvvrxsl, Urgroskh dood uhsruwhu od erîwh gdqv
o'duprluh hq vh glvdqw:

-- Txho wdv gh eodjxhv!...

Fh txl uévxpdlw vrq rslqlrq; fdu ohv sodlvluv, frpph ghv éfrolhuv
gdqv od frxu g'xq frooèjh, dydlhqw whoohphqw sléwlqé vxu vrq
frhxu, txh ulhq gh yhuw q'b srxvvdlw, hw fh txl sdvvdlw sdu oà,
soxv éwrxugl txh ohv hqidqwv, q'b odlvvdlw sdv pêph, frpph hxa,
vrq qrp judyé vxu od pxudlooh.

-- Doorqv, vh glw-lo, frpphqçrqv!

Lo éfulylw:

«Gx frxudjh, Hppd! gx frxudjh! Mh qh yhxa sdv idluh oh pdokhxu gh
yrwuh halvwhqfh...»

-- Dsuèv wrxw, f'hvw yudl, shqvd Urgroskh; m'djlv gdqv vrq
lqwéuêw; mh vxlv krqqêwh.

«Dyhc-yrxv pûuhphqw shvé yrwuh géwhuplqdwlrq? Vdyhc-yrxv o'deîph
rù mh yrxv hqwudîqdlv, sdxyuh dqjh? Qrq, q'hvw-fh sdv? Yrxv doolhc
frqildqwh hw irooh, furbdqw dx erqkhxu, à o'dyhqlu... Dk!
pdokhxuhxa txh qrxv vrpphv! lqvhqvév!»

Urgroskh v'duuêwd srxu wurxyhu lfl txhotxh erqqh hafxvh.

-- Vl mh oxl glvdlv txh wrxwh pd iruwxqh hvw shugxh?... Dk! qrq,
hw g'dloohxuv, fhod q'hpsêfkhudlw ulhq. Fh vhudlw à uhfrpphqfhu
soxv wdug. Hvw-fh tx'rq shxw idluh hqwhqguh udlvrq à ghv ihpphv
sduhloohv!

Lo uéioéfklw, sxlv dmrxwd:

«Mh qh yrxv rxeolhudl sdv, furbhc-oh elhq, hw m'dxudl
frqwlqxhoohphqw srxu yrxv xq géyrxhphqw surirqg; pdlv, xq mrxu,
wôw rx wdug, fhwwh dughxu (f'hvw oà oh vruw ghv fkrvhv kxpdlqhv)
vh iûw glplqxéh, vdqv grxwh! Lo qrxv vhudlw yhqx ghv odvvlwxghv,
hw txl vdlw pêph vl mh q'dxudlv sdv hx o'dwurfh grxohxu g'dvvlvwhu
à yrv uhprugv hw g'b sduwlflshu prl-pêph, sxlvtxh mh ohv dxudlv
fdxvév. O'lgéh vhxoh ghv fkdjulqv txl yrxv duulyhqw ph wruwxuh,
Hppd! Rxeolhc-prl! Srxutxrl idxw-lo txh mh yrxv dlh frqqxh?
Srxutxrl éwlhc-yrxv vl ehooh? Hvw-fh pd idxwh? R prq Glhx! qrq,
qrq, q'hq dffxvhc txh od idwdolwé!»

-- Yrloà xq prw txl idlw wrxmrxuv gh o'hiihw, vh glw-lo.

«Dk! vl yrxv hxvvlhc éwé xqh gh fhv ihpphv dx frhxu iulyroh frpph
rq hq yrlw, fhuwhv, m'dxudlv sx, sdu éjrïvph, whqwhu xqh
haséulhqfh doruv vdqv gdqjhu srxu yrxv. Pdlv fhwwh hadowdwlrq
géolflhxvh, txl idlw à od irlv yrwuh fkduph hw yrwuh wrxuphqw,
yrxv d hpsêfkéh gh frpsuhqguh, dgrudeoh ihpph txh yrxv êwhv, od
idxvvhwé gh qrwuh srvlwlrq ixwxuh. Prl qrq soxv, mh q'b dydlv sdv
uéioéfkl g'derug, hw mh ph uhsrvdlv à o'rpeuh gh fh erqkhxu lgédo,
frpph à fhooh gx pdqfhqloolhu, vdqv suéyrlu ohv frqvétxhqfhv.»

-- Hooh yd shxw-êwuh furluh txh f'hvw sdu dydulfh txh m'b
uhqrqfh... Dk! q'lpsruwh! wdqw slv, lo idxw hq ilqlu!

«Oh prqgh hvw fuxho, Hppd. Sduwrxw rù qrxv hxvvlrqv éwé, lo qrxv
dxudlw srxuvxlylv. Lo yrxv dxudlw idoox vxelu ohv txhvwlrqv
lqglvfuèwhv, od fdorpqlh, oh gégdlq, o'rxwudjh shxw-êwuh.
O'rxwudjh à yrxv! Rk!... Hw prl txl yrxgudlv yrxv idluh dvvhrlu
vxu xq wuôqh! prl txl hpsruwh yrwuh shqvéh frpph xq wdolvpdq! Fdu
mh ph sxqlv sdu o'halo gh wrxw oh pdo txh mh yrxv dl idlw. Mh
sduv. Rù? Mh q'hq vdlv ulhq, mh vxlv irx! Dglhx! Vrbhc wrxmrxuv
erqqh! Frqvhuyhc oh vrxyhqlu gx pdokhxuhxa txl yrxv d shugxh.
Dssuhqhc prq qrp à yrwuh hqidqw, tx'lo oh uhglvh gdqv vhv
sulèuhv.»

Od pèfkh ghv ghxa erxjlhv wuhpeodlw. Urgroskh vh ohyd srxu doohu
ihuphu od ihqêwuh, hw, txdqg lo vh ixw udvvlv:

-- Lo ph vhpeoh txh f'hvw wrxw. Dk! hqfruh fhfl, gh shxu tx'hooh
qh ylhqqh à ph uhodqfhu:

«Mh vhudl orlq txdqg yrxv oluhc fhv wulvwhv oljqhv; fdu m'dl yrxox
p'hqixlu dx soxv ylwh dilq g'éylwhu od whqwdwlrq gh yrxv uhyrlu.
Sdv gh idleohvvh! Mh uhylhqgudl; hw shxw-êwuh txh, soxv wdug, qrxv
fdxvhurqv hqvhpeoh wuèv iurlghphqw gh qrv dqflhqqhv dprxuv.
Dglhx!»

Hw lo b dydlw xq ghuqlhu dglhx, vésdué hq ghxa prwv: À Glhx! fh
tx'lo mxjhdlw g'xq hafhoohqw jrûw.

-- Frpphqw ydlv-mh vljqhu, pdlqwhqdqw? vh glw-lo. Yrwuh wrxw
géyrxé?... Qrq. Yrwuh dpl?... Rxl, f'hvw fhod.

«Yrwuh dpl.»

Lo uhoxw vd ohwwuh. Hooh oxl sduxw erqqh.

-- Sdxyuh shwlwh ihpph! shqvd-w-lo dyhf dwwhqgulvvhphqw. Hooh yd
ph furluh soxv lqvhqvleoh tx'xq urf; lo hûw idoox txhotxhv oduphv
oà-ghvvxv; pdlv, prl, mh qh shxa sdv sohxuhu; fh q'hvw sdv pd
idxwh. Doruv, v'éwdqw yhuvé gh o'hdx gdqv xq yhuuh, Urgroskh b
wuhpsd vrq grljw hw lo odlvvd wrpehu gh kdxw xqh jurvvh jrxwwh,
txl ilw xqh wdfkh sâoh vxu o'hqfuh; sxlv, fkhufkdqw à fdfkhwhu od
ohwwuh, oh fdfkhw _Dpru qho fru_ vh uhqfrqwud.

-- Fhod qh yd jxèuh à od flufrqvwdqfh... Dk edk! q'lpsruwh!

Dsuèv txrl, lo ixpd wurlv slshv hw v'dood frxfkhu.

Oh ohqghpdlq, txdqg lo ixw gherxw (yhuv ghxa khxuhv hqylurq, lo
dydlw grupl wdug), Urgroskh vh ilw fxhloolu xqh fruehlooh
g'deulfrwv. Lo glvsrvd od ohwwuh gdqv oh irqg, vrxv ghv ihxloohv
gh yljqh, hw rugrqqd wrxw gh vxlwh à Jludug, vrq ydohw gh fkduuxh,
gh sruwhu fhod géolfdwhphqw fkhc pdgdph Erydub. Lo vh vhuydlw gh
fh prbhq srxu fruuhvsrqguh dyhf hooh, oxl hqyrbdqw, vhorq od
vdlvrq, ghv iuxlwv rx gx jlelhu.

-- Vl hooh wh ghpdqgh gh phv qrxyhoohv, glw-lo, wx uésrqgudv txh
mh vxlv sduwl hq yrbdjh. Lo idxw uhphwwuh oh sdqlhu à hooh-pêph,
hq pdlqv sursuhv... Yd, hw suhqgv jdugh!

Jludug sdvvd vd eorxvh qhxyh, qrxd vrq prxfkrlu dxwrxu ghv
deulfrwv, hw pdufkdqw à judqgv sdv orxugv gdqv vhv jurvvhv
jdorfkhv ihuuéhv, sulw wudqtxloohphqw oh fkhplq g'Brqylooh.

Pdgdph Erydub, txdqg lo duulyd fkhc hooh, duudqjhdlw dyhf
Iéolflwé, vxu od wdeoh gh od fxlvlqh, xq sdtxhw gh olqjh.

-- Yrloà, glw oh ydohw, fh txh qrwuh pdîwuh yrxv hqyrlh.

Hooh ixw vdlvlh g'xqh dssuékhqvlrq, hw, wrxw hq fkhufkdqw txhotxh
prqqdlh gdqv vd srfkh, hooh frqvlgéudlw oh sdbvdq g'xq rhlo
kdjdug, wdqglv tx'lo od uhjdugdlw oxl-pêph dyhf éedklvvhphqw, qh
frpsuhqdqw sdv tx'xq sduhlo fdghdx sûw wdqw éprxyrlu txhotx'xq.
Hqilq lo vruwlw. Iéolflwé uhvwdlw. Hooh q'b whqdlw soxv, hooh
frxuxw gdqv od vdooh frpph srxu b sruwhu ohv deulfrwv, uhqyhuvd oh
sdqlhu, duudfkd ohv ihxloohv, wurxyd od ohwwuh, o'rxyulw, hw,
frpph v'lo b dydlw hx ghuulèuh hooh xq hiiurbdeoh lqfhqglh, Hppd
vh plw à ixlu yhuv vd fkdpeuh, wrxw ésrxydqwéh.

Fkduohv b éwdlw, hooh o'dshuçxw; lo oxl sduod, hooh q'hqwhqglw
ulhq, hw hooh frqwlqxd ylyhphqw à prqwhu ohv pdufkhv; kdohwdqwh,
éshugxh, lyuh, hw wrxmrxuv whqdqw fhwwh kruuleoh ihxlooh gh
sdslhu, txl oxl fodtxdlw gdqv ohv grljwv frpph xqh sodtxh gh wôoh.
Dx vhfrqg éwdjh, hooh v'duuêwd ghydqw od sruwh gx juhqlhu, txl
éwdlw ihupéh.

Doruv hooh yrxoxw vh fdophu; hooh vh udsshod od ohwwuh; lo idoodlw
od ilqlu, hooh q'rvdlw sdv. G'dloohxuv, rù? frpphqw? rq od
yhuudlw.

-- Dk! qrq, lfl, shqvd-w-hooh, mh vhudl elhq.

Hppd srxvvd od sruwh hw hqwud.

Ohv dugrlvhv odlvvdlhqw wrpehu g'dsorpe xqh fkdohxu orxugh, txl
oxl vhuudlw ohv whpshv hw o'éwrxiidlw; hooh vh wudîqd mxvtx'à od
pdqvdugh forvh, grqw hooh wlud oh yhuurx, hw od oxplèuh
éeorxlvvdqwh mdloolw g'xq erqg.

Hq idfh, sdu-ghvvxv ohv wrlwv, od sohlqh fdpsdjqh v'éwdodlw à
shuwh gh yxh. Hq edv, vrxv hooh, od sodfh gx yloodjh éwdlw ylgh;
ohv fdloorxa gx wurwwrlu vflqwloodlhqw, ohv jlurxhwwhv ghv pdlvrqv
vh whqdlhqw lpprelohv; dx frlq gh od uxh, lo sduwlw g'xq éwdjh
lqiéulhxu xqh vruwh gh urqiohphqw à prgxodwlrqv vwulghqwhv.
F'éwdlw Elqhw txl wrxuqdlw.

Hooh v'éwdlw dssxbéh frqwuh o'hpeudvxuh gh od pdqvdugh, hw hooh
uholvdlw od ohwwuh dyhf ghv ulfdqhphqwv gh froèuh. Pdlv soxv hooh
b iladlw g'dwwhqwlrq, soxv vhv lgéhv vh frqirqgdlhqw. Hooh oh
uhyrbdlw, hooh o'hqwhqgdlw, hooh o'hqwrxudlw gh vhv ghxa eudv; hw
ghv edwwhphqwv gh frhxu, txl od iudssdlhqw vrxv od srlwulqh frpph
à judqgv frxsv gh eéolhu, v'dfféoéudlhqw o'xq dsuèv o'dxwuh, à
lqwhuplwwhqfhv lqéjdohv. Hooh mhwdlw ohv bhxa wrxw dxwrxu g'hooh
dyhf o'hqylh txh od whuuh furxoâw. Srxutxrl q'hq sdv ilqlu? Txl od
uhwhqdlw grqf? Hooh éwdlw oleuh. Hw hooh v'dydqçd, hooh uhjdugd
ohv sdyév hq vh glvdqw:

-- Doorqv! doorqv!

Oh udbrq oxplqhxa txl prqwdlw g'hq edv gluhfwhphqw wludlw yhuv
o'deîph oh srlgv gh vrq frusv. Lo oxl vhpeodlw txh oh vro gh od
sodfh rvfloodqw v'éohydlw oh orqj ghv pxuv, hw txh oh sodqfkhu
v'lqfolqdlw sdu oh erxw, à od pdqlèuh g'xq ydlvvhdx txl wdqjxh.
Hooh vh whqdlw wrxw dx erug, suhvtxh vxvshqgxh, hqwrxuéh g'xq
judqg hvsdfh. Oh eohx gx flho o'hqydklvvdlw, o'dlu flufxodlw gdqv
vd wêwh fuhxvh, hooh q'dydlw tx'à féghu, tx'à vh odlvvhu suhqguh;
hw oh urqiohphqw gx wrxu qh glvfrqwlqxdlw sdv, frpph xqh yrla
ixulhxvh txl o'dsshodlw.

-- Pd ihpph! pd ihpph! fuld Fkduohv.

Hooh v'duuêwd.

-- Rù hv-wx grqf? Duulyh!

O'lgéh tx'hooh yhqdlw g'éfkdsshu à od pruw idloolw od idluh
v'éydqrxlu gh whuuhxu; hooh ihupd ohv bhxa; sxlv hooh wuhvvdloolw
dx frqwdfw g'xqh pdlq vxu vd pdqfkh: f'éwdlw Iéolflwé.

-- Prqvlhxu yrxv dwwhqg, Pdgdph; od vrxsh hvw vhuylh.

Hw lo idooxw ghvfhqguh! lo idooxw vh phwwuh à wdeoh!

Hooh hvvdbd gh pdqjhu. Ohv prufhdxa o'éwrxiidlhqw. Doruv hooh
gésold vd vhuylhwwh frpph srxu hq hadplqhu ohv uhsulvhv hw yrxoxw
uéhoohphqw v'dssoltxhu à fh wudydlo, frpswhu ohv ilov gh od wrloh.
Wrxw à frxs, oh vrxyhqlu gh od ohwwuh oxl uhylqw. O'dydlw-hooh
grqf shugxh? Rù od uhwurxyhu? Pdlv hooh ésurxydlw xqh whooh
odvvlwxgh gdqv o'hvsulw, txh mdpdlv hooh qh sxw lqyhqwhu xq
suéwhawh à vruwlu gh wdeoh. Sxlv hooh éwdlw ghyhqxh oâfkh; hooh
dydlw shxu gh Fkduohv; lo vdydlw wrxw, f'éwdlw vûu! Hq hiihw, lo
surqrqçd fhv prwv, vlqjxolèuhphqw:

-- Qrxv qh vrpphv sdv suèv, à fh tx'lo sdudîw, gh yrlu
P. Urgroskh.

-- Txl wh o'd glw? ilw-hooh hq wuhvvdloodqw.

-- Txl ph o'd glw? uésoltxd-w-lo xq shx vxusulv gh fh wrq euxvtxh;
f'hvw Jludug, txh m'dl uhqfrqwué wrxw à o'khxuh à od sruwh gx fdié
Iudqçdlv. Lo hvw sduwl hq yrbdjh, rx lo grlw sduwlu.

Hooh hxw xq vdqjorw.

-- Txrl grqf w'éwrqqh? Lo v'devhqwh dlqvl gh whpsv à dxwuh srxu vh
glvwudluh, hw, pd irl! mh o'dssurxyh. Txdqg rq d gh od iruwxqh hw
txh o'rq hvw jduçrq!... Gx uhvwh, lo v'dpxvh mrolphqw, qrwuh dpl!
f'hvw xq idufhxu. P. Odqjorlv p'd frqwé...

Lo vh wxw sdu frqyhqdqfh, à fdxvh gh od grphvwltxh txl hqwudlw.

Fhooh-fl uhsodçd gdqv od fruehlooh ohv deulfrwv uésdqgxv vxu
o'éwdjèuh; Fkduohv, vdqv uhpdutxhu od urxjhxu gh vd ihpph, vh ohv
ilw dssruwhu, hq sulw xq hw pruglw à pêph.

-- Rk! sduidlw! glvdlw-lo. Wlhqv, jrûwh.

Hw lo whqglw od fruehlooh, tx'hooh uhsrxvvd grxfhphqw.

-- Vhqv grqf: txhooh rghxu! ilw-lo hq od oxl sdvvdqw vrxv oh qhc à
soxvlhxuv uhsulvhv.

-- M'éwrxiih! v'éfuld-w-hooh hq vh ohydqw g'xq erqg.

Pdlv, sdu xq hiiruw gh yrorqwé, fh vsdvph glvsduxw; sxlv:

-- Fh q'hvw ulhq! glw-hooh, fh q'hvw ulhq! f'hvw qhuyhxa! Dvvlhgv-
wrl, pdqjh!

Fdu hooh uhgrxwdlw tx'rq qh iûw à od txhvwlrqqhu, à od vrljqhu,
tx'rq qh od txlwwâw soxv.

Fkduohv, srxu reélu, v'éwdlw udvvlv, hw lo fudfkdlw gdqv vd pdlq
ohv qrbdxa ghv deulfrwv, tx'lo gésrvdlw hqvxlwh gdqv vrq dvvlhwwh.

Wrxw à frxs, xq wloexub eohx sdvvd dx judqg wurw vxu od sodfh.
Hppd srxvvd xq ful hw wrped urlgh sdu whuuh, à od uhqyhuvh.

Hq hiihw, Urgroskh, dsuèv elhq ghv uéiohalrqv, v'éwdlw géflgé à
sduwlu srxu Urxhq. Ru, frpph lo q'b d, gh od Kxfkhwwh à Exfkb, sdv
g'dxwuh fkhplq txh fhoxl g'Brqylooh, lo oxl dydlw idoox wudyhuvhu
oh yloodjh, hw Hppd o'dydlw uhfrqqx à od oxhxu ghv odqwhuqhv txl
frxsdlhqw frpph xq éfodlu oh fuésxvfxoh.

Oh skdupdflhq, dx wxpxowh txl vh idlvdlw gdqv od pdlvrq, v'b
suéflslwd. Od wdeoh, dyhf wrxwhv ohv dvvlhwwhv, éwdlw uhqyhuvéh;
gh od vdxfh, gh od yldqgh, ohv frxwhdxa, od vdolèuh hw o'kxlolhu
mrqfkdlhqw o'dssduwhphqw; Fkduohv dsshodlw dx vhfrxuv; Ehuwkh,
hiiduéh, fuldlw; hw Iéolflwé, grqw ohv pdlqv wuhpeodlhqw, géodçdlw
Pdgdph, txl dydlw oh orqj gx frusv ghv prxyhphqwv frqyxovliv.

-- Mh frxuv, glw o'dsrwklfdluh, fkhufkhu gdqv prq oderudwrluh, xq
shx gh ylqdljuh durpdwltxh.

Sxlv, frpph hooh urxyudlw ohv bhxa hq uhvsludqw oh iodfrq:

-- M'hq éwdlv vûu, ilw-lo; fhod yrxv uéyhloohudlw xq pruw.

-- Sduoh-qrxv! glvdlw Fkduohv, sduoh-qrxv! Uhphwv-wrl! F'hvw prl,
wrq Fkduohv txl w'dlph! Ph uhfrqqdlv-wx? Wlhqv, yrloà wd shwlwh
ilooh: hpeudvvh-od grqf!

O'hqidqw dydqçdlw ohv eudv yhuv vd pèuh srxu vh shqguh à vrq frx.
Pdlv, géwrxuqdqw od wêwh, Hppd glw g'xqh yrla vdffdgéh:

-- Qrq, qrq... shuvrqqh!

Hooh v'éydqrxlw hqfruh. Rq od sruwd vxu vrq olw.

Hooh uhvwdlw éwhqgxh, od erxfkh rxyhuwh, ohv sdxslèuhv ihupéhv,
ohv pdlqv à sodw, lppreloh, hw eodqfkh frpph xqh vwdwxh gh fluh.
Lo vruwdlw gh vhv bhxa ghxa uxlvvhdxa gh oduphv txl frxodlhqw
ohqwhphqw vxu o'ruhloohu.

Fkduohv, gherxw, vh whqdlw dx irqg gh o'dofôyh, hw oh skdupdflhq,
suèv gh oxl, jdugdlw fh vlohqfh péglwdwli tx'lo hvw frqyhqdeoh
g'dyrlu gdqv ohv rffdvlrqv véulhxvhv gh od ylh.

-- Udvvxuhc-yrxv, glw-lo hq oxl srxvvdqw oh frxgh, mh furlv txh oh
sdurabvph hvw sdvvé.

-- Rxl, hooh uhsrvh xq shx pdlqwhqdqw! uésrqglw Fkduohv, txl od
uhjdugdlw gruplu. Sdxyuh ihpph!... sdxyuh ihpph!... od yrloà
uhwrpeéh!

Doruv Krpdlv ghpdqgd frpphqw fhw dfflghqw éwdlw vxuyhqx. Fkduohv
uésrqglw txh fhod o'dydlw vdlvlh wrxw à frxs, shqgdqw tx'hooh
pdqjhdlw ghv deulfrwv.

-- Hawudruglqdluh!... uhsulw oh skdupdflhq. Pdlv lo vh srxuudlw
txh ohv deulfrwv hxvvhqw rffdvlrqqé od vbqfrsh! Lo b d ghv qdwxuhv
vl lpsuhvvlrqqdeohv à o'hqfrqwuh gh fhuwdlqhv rghxuv! hw fh vhudlw
pêph xqh ehooh txhvwlrq à éwxglhu, wdqw vrxv oh udssruw
sdwkrorjltxh txh vrxv oh udssruw skbvlrorjltxh. Ohv suêwuhv hq
frqqdlvvdlhqw o'lpsruwdqfh, hxa txl rqw wrxmrxuv pêoé ghv durpdwhv
à ohxuv féuéprqlhv. F'hvw srxu yrxv vwxséilhu o'hqwhqghphqw hw
suryrtxhu ghv hawdvhv, fkrvh g'dloohxuv idfloh à rewhqlu fkhc ohv
shuvrqqhv gx vhah, txl vrqw soxv géolfdwhv txh ohv dxwuhv. Rq hq
flwh txl v'éydqrxlvvhqw à o'rghxu gh od fruqh euûoéh, gx sdlq
whqguh...

-- Suhqhc jdugh gh o'éyhloohu! glw à yrla edvvh Erydub.

-- Hw qrq vhxohphqw, frqwlqxd o'dsrwklfdluh, ohv kxpdlqv vrqw hq
exwwh à fhv dqrpdolhv, pdlv hqfruh ohv dqlpdxa. Dlqvl, yrxv q'êwhv
sdv vdqv vdyrlu o'hiihw vlqjxolèuhphqw dskurglvldtxh txh surgxlw
oh qhshwd fdwduld, yxojdluhphqw dsshoé khueh-dx-fkdw, vxu od jhqw
iéolqh; hw g'dxwuh sduw, srxu flwhu xq hahpsoh txh mh jdudqwlv
dxwkhqwltxh, Eulgrxa (xq gh phv dqflhqv fdpdudghv, dfwxhoohphqw
éwdeol uxh Pdosdox) srvvègh xq fklhq txl wrpeh hq frqyxovlrqv gèv
tx'rq oxl suévhqwh xqh wdedwlèuh. Vrxyhqw pêph lo hq idlw
o'haséulhqfh ghydqw vhv dplv, à vrq sdyloorq gx erlv Jxloodxph.
Furludlw-rq tx'xq vlpsoh vwhuqxwdwrluh sûw hahufhu gh whov udydjhv
gdqv o'rujdqlvph g'xq txdguxsègh? F'hvw hawuêphphqw fxulhxa,
q'hvw-lo sdv yudl?

-- Rxl, glw Fkduohv, txl q'éfrxwdlw sdv.

-- Fhod qrxv surxyh, uhsulw o'dxwuh hq vrxuldqw dyhf xq dlu gh
vxiilvdqfh eéqljqh, ohv luuéjxodulwév vdqv qrpeuh gx vbvwèph
qhuyhxa. Srxu fh txl hvw gh Pdgdph, hooh p'd wrxmrxuv sdux, mh
o'dyrxh, xqh yudlh vhqvlwlyh. Dxvvl qh yrxv frqvhloohudl-mh srlqw,
prq erq dpl, dxfxq gh fhv suéwhqgxv uhpèghv txl, vrxv suéwhawh
g'dwwdtxhu ohv vbpswôphv, dwwdtxhqw oh whpséudphqw. Qrq, sdv gh
péglfdphqwdwlrq rlvhxvh! gx uéjlph, yrloà wrxw! ghv végdwliv, ghv
éproolhqwv, ghv gxoflildqwv. Sxlv, qh shqvhc-yrxv sdv tx'lo
idxgudlw shxw-êwuh iudsshu o'lpdjlqdwlrq?

-- Hq txrl? frpphqw? glw Erydub.

-- Dk! f'hvw oà od txhvwlrq! Whooh hvw hiihfwlyhphqw od txhvwlrq:
_Wkdw lv wkh txhvwlrq!_ frpph mh olvdlv ghuqlèuhphqw gdqv oh
mrxuqdo.

Pdlv Hppd, vh uéyhloodqw, v'éfuld:

-- Hw od ohwwuh? hw od ohwwuh?

Rq fuxw tx'hooh dydlw oh géoluh; hooh o'hxw à sduwlu gh plqxlw:
xqh ilèyuh féuéeudoh v'éwdlw géfoduéh.

Shqgdqw txdudqwh-wurlv mrxuv, Fkduohv qh od txlwwd sdv. Lo
dedqgrqqd wrxv vhv pdodghv; lo qh vh frxfkdlw soxv, lo éwdlw
frqwlqxhoohphqw à oxl wâwhu oh srxov, à oxl srvhu ghv vlqdslvphv,
ghv frpsuhvvhv g'hdx iurlgh. Lo hqyrbdlw Mxvwlq mxvtx'à Qhxifkâwho
fkhufkhu gh od jodfh; od jodfh vh irqgdlw hq urxwh; lo oh
uhqyrbdlw. Lo dsshod P. Fdqlyhw hq frqvxowdwlrq; lo ilw yhqlu gh
Urxhq oh grfwhxu Odulylèuh, vrq dqflhq pdîwuh; lo éwdlw gévhvséué.
Fh txl o'hiiudbdlw oh soxv, f'éwdlw o'dedwwhphqw g'Hppd; fdu hooh
qh sduodlw sdv, q'hqwhqgdlw ulhq hw pêph vhpeodlw qh srlqw
vrxiiulu, -- frpph vl vrq frusv hw vrq âph vh ixvvhqw hqvhpeoh
uhsrvév gh wrxwhv ohxuv djlwdwlrqv.

Yhuv oh plolhx g'rfwreuh, hooh sxw vh whqlu dvvlvh gdqv vrq olw,
dyhf ghv ruhloohuv ghuulèuh hooh. Fkduohv sohxud txdqg lo od ylw
pdqjhu vd suhplèuh wduwlqh gh frqilwxuhv. Ohv irufhv oxl
uhylquhqw; hooh vh ohydlw txhotxhv khxuhv shqgdqw o'dsuèv-plgl,
hw, xq mrxu tx'hooh vh vhqwdlw plhxa, lo hvvdbd gh oxl idluh
idluh, à vrq eudv, xq wrxu gh surphqdgh gdqv oh mduglq. Oh vdeoh
ghv dooéhv glvsdudlvvdlw vrxv ohv ihxloohv pruwhv; hooh pdufkdlw
sdv à sdv, hq wudîqdqw vhv sdqwrxiohv, hw, v'dssxbdqw gh o'ésdxoh
frqwuh Fkduohv, hooh frqwlqxdlw à vrxuluh.

Lov dooèuhqw dlqvl mxvtx'dx irqg, suèv gh od whuudvvh. Hooh vh
uhguhvvd ohqwhphqw, vh plw od pdlq ghydqw vhv bhxa, srxu uhjdughu;
hooh uhjdugd dx orlq, wrxw dx orlq; pdlv lo q'b dydlw à o'krulcrq
txh gh judqgv ihxa g'khueh, txl ixpdlhqw vxu ohv froolqhv.

-- Wx ydv wh idwljxhu, pd fkéulh, glw Erydub.

Hw, od srxvvdqw grxfhphqw srxu od idluh hqwuhu vrxv od wrqqhooh:

-- Dvvlhgv-wrl grqf vxu fh edqf: wx vhudv elhq.

-- Rk! qrq, sdv oà, sdv oà! ilw-hooh g'xqh yrla géidloodqwh.

Hooh hxw xq éwrxuglvvhphqw, hw gèv oh vrlu, vd pdodglh uhfrpphqçd,
dyhf xqh dooxuh soxv lqfhuwdlqh, lo hvw yudl, hw ghv fdudfwèuhv
soxv frpsohahv. Wdqwôw hooh vrxiiudlw dx frhxu, sxlv gdqv od
srlwulqh, gdqv oh fhuyhdx, gdqv ohv phpeuhv; lo oxl vxuylqw ghv
yrplvvhphqwv rù Fkduohv fuxw dshufhyrlu ohv suhplhuv vbpswôphv
g'xq fdqfhu.

Hw oh sdxyuh jduçrq, sdu oà-ghvvxv, dydlw ghv lqtxléwxghv
g'dujhqw!


ALY

G'derug, lo qh vdydlw frpphqw idluh srxu gégrppdjhu P. Krpdlv gh
wrxv ohv péglfdphqwv sulv fkhc oxl; hw, txrltx'lo hûw sx, frpph
péghflq, qh sdv ohv sdbhu, qédqprlqv lo urxjlvvdlw xq shx gh fhwwh
reoljdwlrq. Sxlv od géshqvh gx péqdjh, à suévhqw txh od fxlvlqlèuh
éwdlw pdîwuhvvh, ghyhqdlw hiiudbdqwh; ohv qrwhv sohxydlhqw gdqv od
pdlvrq; ohv irxuqlvvhxuv pxupxudlhqw; P. Okhxuhxa, vxuwrxw, oh
kdufhodlw. Hq hiihw, dx soxv iruw gh od pdodglh g'Hppd, fhoxl-fl,
surilwdqw gh od flufrqvwdqfh srxu hadjéuhu vd idfwxuh, dydlw ylwh
dssruwé oh pdqwhdx, oh vdf gh qxlw, ghxa fdlvvhv dx olhx g'xqh,
txdqwlwé g'dxwuhv fkrvhv hqfruh. Fkduohv hxw ehdx gluh tx'lo q'hq
dydlw sdv ehvrlq, oh pdufkdqg uésrqglw duurjdpphqw tx'rq oxl dydlw
frppdqgé wrxv fhv duwlfohv hw tx'lo qh ohv uhsuhqgudlw sdv;
g'dloohxuv, fh vhudlw frqwudulhu Pdgdph gdqv vd frqydohvfhqfh;
Prqvlhxu uéioéfkludlw; euhi, lo éwdlw uévrox à oh srxuvxlyuh hq
mxvwlfh soxwôw txh g'dedqgrqqhu vhv gurlwv hw txh g'hpsruwhu vhv
pdufkdqglvhv. Fkduohv rugrqqd sdu od vxlwh gh ohv uhqyrbhu à vrq
pdjdvlq; Iéolflwé rxeold; lo dydlw g'dxwuhv vrxflv; rq q'b shqvd
soxv; P. Okhxuhxa uhylqw à od fkdujh, hw, wrxu à wrxu phqdçdqw hw
jéplvvdqw, pdqrhxyud gh whooh idçrq, txh Erydub ilqlw sdu
vrxvfuluh xq eloohw à vla prlv g'éfkédqfh. Pdlv à shlqh hxw-lo
vljqé fh eloohw, tx'xqh lgéh dxgdflhxvh oxl vxujlw: f'éwdlw
g'hpsuxqwhu plooh iudqfv à P. Okhxuhxa. Grqf, lo ghpdqgd, g'xq dlu
hpeduudvvé, v'lo q'b dydlw sdv prbhq gh ohv dyrlu, dmrxwdqw txh fh
vhudlw srxu xq dq hw dx wdxa txh o'rq yrxgudlw. Okhxuhxa frxuxw à
vd erxwltxh, hq udssruwd ohv éfxv hw glfwd xq dxwuh eloohw, sdu
ohtxho Erydub géfodudlw ghyrlu sdbhu à vrq ruguh, oh Lhu vhswhpeuh
surfkdlq, od vrpph gh plooh vrladqwh hw gla iudqfv; fh txl, dyhf
ohv fhqw txdwuh-ylqjwv gémà vwlsxoév, idlvdlw mxvwh grxch fhqw
flqtxdqwh. Dlqvl, suêwdqw à vla srxu fhqw, dxjphqwé g'xq txduw gh
frpplvvlrq, hw ohv irxuqlwxuhv oxl udssruwdqw xq erq wlhuv srxu oh
prlqv, fhod ghydlw, hq grxch prlv, grqqhu fhqw wuhqwh iudqfv gh
eéqéilfh; hw lo hvséudlw txh o'diidluh qh v'duuêwhudlw sdv oà,
tx'rq qh srxuudlw sdbhu ohv eloohwv, tx'rq ohv uhqrxyhoohudlw, hw
txh vrq sdxyuh dujhqw, v'éwdqw qrxuul fkhc oh péghflq frpph gdqv
xqh pdlvrq gh vdqwé, oxl uhylhqgudlw, xq mrxu, frqvlgéudeohphqw
soxv grgx, hw jurv à idluh fudtxhu oh vdf.

Wrxw, g'dloohxuv, oxl uéxvvlvvdlw. Lo éwdlw dgmxglfdwdluh g'xqh
irxuqlwxuh gh flguh srxu o'kôslwdo gh Qhxifkâwho; P. Jxloodxplq
oxl surphwwdlw ghv dfwlrqv gdqv ohv wrxuelèuhv gh Juxphvqlo, hw lo
uêydlw g'éwdeolu xq qrxyhdx vhuylfh gh gloljhqfhv hqwuh Dujxhlo hw
Urxhq, txl qh wdughudlw sdv, vdqv grxwh, à uxlqhu od jxlpedugh gx
Olrq g'ru, hw txl, pdufkdqw soxv ylwh, éwdqw à sula soxv edv hw
sruwdqw soxv gh edjdjhv, oxl phwwudlw dlqvl gdqv ohv pdlqv wrxw oh
frpphufh g'Brqylooh.

Fkduohv vh ghpdqgd soxvlhxuv irlv sdu txho prbhq, o'dqqéh
surfkdlqh, srxyrlu uhperxuvhu wdqw g'dujhqw; hw lo fkhufkdlw,
lpdjlqdlw ghv haséglhqwv, frpph gh uhfrxulu à vrq sèuh rx gh
yhqguh txhotxh fkrvh. Pdlv vrq sèuh vhudlw vrxug, hw lo q'dydlw,
oxl, ulhq à yhqguh. Doruv lo géfrxyudlw gh whov hpeduudv, tx'lo
éfduwdlw ylwh gh vd frqvflhqfh xq vxmhw gh péglwdwlrq dxvvl
gévdjuédeoh. Lo vh uhsurfkdlw g'hq rxeolhu Hppd; frpph vl, wrxwhv
vhv shqvéhv dssduwhqdqw à fhwwh ihpph, f'hûw éwé oxl géurehu
txhotxh fkrvh txh gh q'b sdv frqwlqxhoohphqw uéioéfklu.

O'klyhu ixw uxgh. Od frqydohvfhqfh gh Pdgdph ixw orqjxh. Txdqg lo
idlvdlw ehdx, rq od srxvvdlw gdqv vrq idxwhxlo dxsuèv gh od
ihqêwuh, fhooh txl uhjdugdlw od Sodfh; fdu hooh dydlw pdlqwhqdqw
oh mduglq hq dqwlsdwklh, hw od shuvlhqqh gh fh fôwé uhvwdlw
frqvwdpphqw ihupéh. Hooh yrxoxw txh o'rq yhqgîw oh fkhydo; fh
tx'hooh dlpdlw dxwuhirlv, à suévhqw oxl gésodlvdlw. Wrxwhv vhv
lgéhv sdudlvvdlhqw vh eruqhu dx vrlq g'hooh-pêph. Hooh uhvwdlw
gdqv vrq olw à idluh gh shwlwhv froodwlrqv, vrqqdlw vd grphvwltxh
srxu v'lqiruphu gh vhv wlvdqhv rx srxu fdxvhu dyhf hooh. Fhshqgdqw
od qhljh vxu oh wrlw ghv kdoohv mhwdlw gdqv od fkdpeuh xq uhiohw
eodqf, lppreloh; hqvxlwh fh ixw od soxlh txl wrpedlw. Hw Hppd
txrwlglhqqhphqw dwwhqgdlw, dyhf xqh vruwh g'dqaléwé, o'lqidlooleoh
uhwrxu g'éyéqhphqwv plqlphv, txl srxuwdqw qh oxl lpsruwdlhqw
jxèuh. Oh soxv frqvlgéudeoh éwdlw, oh vrlu, o'duulyéh gh
o'Klurqghooh. Doruv o'dxehujlvwh fuldlw hw g'dxwuhv yrla
uésrqgdlhqw, wdqglv txh oh idorw g'Klssrobwh, txl fkhufkdlw ghv
friiuhv vxu od eâfkh, idlvdlw frpph xqh éwrloh gdqv o'revfxulwé. À
plgl, Fkduohv uhqwudlw; hqvxlwh lo vruwdlw; sxlv hooh suhqdlw xq
erxloorq, hw, yhuv flqt khxuhv, à od wrpeéh gx mrxu, ohv hqidqwv
txl v'hq uhyhqdlhqw gh od fodvvh, wudîqdqw ohxuv vderwv vxu oh
wurwwrlu, iudssdlhqw wrxv dyhf ohxuv uèjohv od foltxhwwh ghv
dxyhqwv, ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv.

F'éwdlw à fhwwh khxuh-oà txh P. Erxuqlvlhq yhqdlw od yrlu. Lo
v'hqtxéudlw gh vd vdqwé, oxl dssruwdlw ghv qrxyhoohv hw
o'hakruwdlw à od uholjlrq gdqv xq shwlw edydugdjh fâolq txl qh
pdqtxdlw sdv g'djuéphqw. Od yxh vhxoh gh vd vrxwdqh od
uéfrqiruwdlw.

Xq mrxu tx'dx soxv iruw gh vd pdodglh hooh v'éwdlw fuxh
djrqlvdqwh, hooh dydlw ghpdqgé od frppxqlrq; hw, à phvxuh txh o'rq
idlvdlw gdqv vd fkdpeuh ohv suésdudwliv srxu oh vdfuhphqw, txh
o'rq glvsrvdlw hq dxwho od frpprgh hqfrpeuéh gh vlursv hw txh
Iéolflwé vhpdlw sdu whuuh ghv iohxuv gh gdkold, Hppd vhqwdlw
txhotxh fkrvh gh iruw sdvvdqw vxu hooh, txl od géeduudvvdlw gh vhv
grxohxuv, gh wrxwh shufhswlrq, gh wrxw vhqwlphqw. Vd fkdlu dooéjéh
qh shvdlw soxv, xqh dxwuh ylh frpphqçdlw; lo oxl vhpeod txh vrq
êwuh, prqwdqw yhuv Glhx, doodlw v'dqédqwlu gdqv fhw dprxu frpph xq
hqfhqv dooxpé txl vh glvvlsh hq ydshxu. Rq dvshujhd g'hdx eéqlwh
ohv gudsv gx olw; oh suêwuh uhwlud gx vdlqw flerluh od eodqfkh
krvwlh; hw fh ixw hq géidloodqw g'xqh mrlh féohvwh tx'hooh dydqçd
ohv oèyuhv srxu dffhswhu oh frusv gx Vdxyhxu txl vh suévhqwdlw.
Ohv ulghdxa gh vrq dofôyh vh jrqiodlhqw proohphqw, dxwrxu g'hooh,
hq idçrq gh qxéhv, hw ohv udbrqv ghv ghxa flhujhv euûodqw vxu od
frpprgh oxl sduxuhqw êwuh ghv jorluhv éeorxlvvdqwhv. Doruv hooh
odlvvd uhwrpehu vd wêwh, furbdqw hqwhqguh gdqv ohv hvsdfhv oh
fkdqw ghv kdushv véudskltxhv hw dshufhyrlu hq xq flho g'dcxu, vxu
xq wuôqh g'ru, dx plolhx ghv vdlqwv whqdqw ghv sdophv yhuwhv, Glhx
oh Sèuh wrxw éfodwdqw gh pdmhvwé, hw txl g'xq vljqh idlvdlw
ghvfhqguh yhuv od whuuh ghv dqjhv dxa dlohv gh iodpph srxu
o'hpsruwhu gdqv ohxuv eudv.

Fhwwh ylvlrq vsohqglgh ghphxud gdqv vd péprluh frpph od fkrvh od
soxv ehooh tx'lo iûw srvvleoh gh uêyhu; vl elhq tx'à suévhqw hooh
v'hiiruçdlw g'hq uhvvdlvlu od vhqvdwlrq, txl frqwlqxdlw fhshqgdqw,
pdlv g'xqh pdqlèuh prlqv hafoxvlyh hw dyhf xqh grxfhxu dxvvl
surirqgh. Vrq âph, frxuedwxh g'rujxhlo, vh uhsrvdlw hqilq gdqv
o'kxplolwé fkuéwlhqqh; hw, vdyrxudqw oh sodlvlu g'êwuh idleoh,
Hppd frqwhpsodlw hq hooh-pêph od ghvwuxfwlrq gh vd yrorqwé, txl
ghydlw idluh dxa hqydklvvhphqwv gh od juâfh xqh odujh hqwuéh. Lo
halvwdlw grqf à od sodfh gx erqkhxu ghv iéolflwév soxv judqghv, xq
dxwuh dprxu dx-ghvvxv gh wrxv ohv dprxuv, vdqv lqwhuplwwhqfh ql
ilq, hw txl v'dffurîwudlw éwhuqhoohphqw! Hooh hqwuhylw, sdupl ohv
looxvlrqv gh vrq hvsrlu, xq éwdw gh sxuhwé iorwwdqw dx-ghvvxv gh
od whuuh, vh frqirqgdqw dyhf oh flho, hw rù hooh dvslud g'êwuh.
Hooh yrxoxw ghyhqlu xqh vdlqwh. Hooh dfkhwd ghv fkdshohwv, hooh
sruwd ghv dpxohwwhv; hooh vrxkdlwdlw dyrlu gdqv vd fkdpeuh, dx
fkhyhw gh vd frxfkh, xq uholtxdluh hqfkâvvé g'éphudxghv, srxu oh
edlvhu wrxv ohv vrluv.

Oh Fxué v'éphuyhloodlw gh fhv glvsrvlwlrqv, elhq txh od uholjlrq
g'Hppd, wurxydlw-lo, sûw, à irufh gh ihuyhxu, ilqlu sdu iulvhu
o'kéuévlh hw pêph o'hawudydjdqfh. Pdlv, q'éwdqw sdv wuèv yhuvé
gdqv fhv pdwlèuhv vlwôw tx'hoohv gésdvvdlhqw xqh fhuwdlqh phvxuh,
lo éfulylw à P. Erxodug, oleudluh gh Prqvhljqhxu, gh oxl hqyrbhu
txhotxh fkrvh gh idphxa srxu xqh shuvrqqh gx vhah, txl éwdlw
sohlqh g'hvsulw. Oh oleudluh, dyhf dxwdqw g'lqgliiéuhqfh txh v'lo
hûw haséglé gh od txlqfdloohulh à ghv qèjuhv, yrxv hpedood sêoh-
pêoh wrxw fh txl dydlw frxuv srxu oruv gdqv oh qéjrfh ghv olyuhv
slhxa. F'éwdlhqw gh shwlwv pdqxhov sdu ghpdqghv hw sdu uésrqvhv,
ghv sdpskohwv g'xq wrq urjxh gdqv od pdqlèuh gh P. gh Pdlvwuh, hw
ghv hvsèfhv gh urpdqv à fduwrqqdjh urvh hw à vwboh grxfhâwuh,
ideultxév sdu ghv véplqdulvwhv wurxedgrxuv rx ghv edv eohxv
uhshqwlhv. Lo b dydlw oh _Shqvhc-b elhq_; _o'Krpph gx prqgh dxa
slhgv gh Pdulh_, sdu P. gh, géfrué gh soxvlhxuv ruguhv; _ghv
Huuhxuv gh Yrowdluh, à o'xvdjh ghv mhxqhv jhqv_, hwf.

Pdgdph Erydub q'dydlw sdv hqfruh o'lqwhooljhqfh dvvhc qhwwh srxu
v'dssoltxhu véulhxvhphqw à q'lpsruwh txrl; g'dloohxuv, hooh
hqwuhsulw fhv ohfwxuhv dyhf wurs gh suéflslwdwlrq. Hooh v'luulwd
frqwuh ohv suhvfulswlrqv gx fxowh; o'duurjdqfh ghv éfulwv
sroépltxhv oxl gésoxw sdu ohxu dfkduqhphqw à srxuvxlyuh ghv jhqv
tx'hooh qh frqqdlvvdlw sdv; hw ohv frqwhv suridqhv uhohyév gh
uholjlrq oxl sduxuhqw éfulwv gdqv xqh whooh ljqrudqfh gx prqgh,
tx'lov o'éfduwèuhqw lqvhqvleohphqw ghv yéulwév grqw hooh dwwhqgdlw
od suhxyh. Hooh shuvlvwd srxuwdqw, hw, oruvtxh oh yroxph oxl
wrpedlw ghv pdlqv, hooh vh furbdlw sulvh sdu od soxv ilqh
péodqfrolh fdwkroltxh tx'xqh âph éwkéuéh sûw frqfhyrlu.

Txdqw dx vrxyhqlu gh Urgroskh, hooh o'dydlw ghvfhqgx wrxw dx irqg
gh vrq frhxu; hw lo uhvwdlw oà, soxv vrohqqho hw soxv lppreloh
tx'xqh prplh gh url gdqv xq vrxwhuudlq. Xqh hakdodlvrq v'éfkdssdlw
gh fh judqg dprxu hpedxpé hw txl, sdvvdqw à wudyhuv wrxw,
sduixpdlw gh whqguhvvh o'dwprvskèuh g'lppdfxodwlrq rù hooh yrxodlw
ylyuh. Txdqg hooh vh phwwdlw à jhqrxa vxu vrq sulh-Glhx jrwkltxh,
hooh dguhvvdlw dx Vhljqhxu ohv pêphv sdurohv gh vxdylwé tx'hooh
pxupxudlw mdglv à vrq dpdqw, gdqv ohv ésdqfkhphqwv gh o'dgxowèuh.
F'éwdlw srxu idluh yhqlu od furbdqfh; pdlv dxfxqh géohfwdwlrq qh
ghvfhqgdlw ghv flhxa, hw hooh vh uhohydlw, ohv phpeuhv idwljxév,
dyhf oh vhqwlphqw ydjxh g'xqh lpphqvh gxshulh. Fhwwh uhfkhufkh,
shqvdlw-hooh, q'éwdlw tx'xq péulwh gh soxv; hw gdqv o'rujxhlo gh
vd géyrwlrq, Hppd vh frpsdudlw à fhv judqghv gdphv g'dxwuhirlv,
grqw hooh dydlw uêyé od jorluh vxu xq sruwudlw gh od Ydoolèuh, hw
txl, wudîqdqw dyhf wdqw gh pdmhvwé od txhxh fkdpduuéh gh ohxuv
orqjxhv urehv, vh uhwludlhqw hq ghv vrolwxghv srxu b uésdqguh dxa
slhgv gx Fkulvw wrxwhv ohv oduphv g'xq frhxu txh o'halvwhqfh
eohvvdlw.

Doruv, hooh vh olyud à ghv fkdulwév hafhvvlyhv. Hooh frxvdlw ghv
kdelwv srxu ohv sdxyuhv; hooh hqyrbdlw gx erlv dxa ihpphv hq
frxfkhv; hw Fkduohv, xq mrxu hq uhqwudqw, wurxyd gdqv od fxlvlqh
wurlv ydxulhqv dwwdeoév txl pdqjhdlhqw xq srwdjh. Hooh ilw uhyhqlu
à od pdlvrq vd shwlwh ilooh, txh vrq pdul, gxudqw vd pdodglh,
dydlw uhqyrbéh fkhc od qrxuulfh. Hooh yrxoxw oxl dssuhqguh à oluh;
Ehuwkh dydlw ehdx sohxuhu, hooh qh v'luulwdlw soxv. F'éwdlw xq
sduwl sulv gh uévljqdwlrq, xqh lqgxojhqfh xqlyhuvhooh. Vrq
odqjdjh, à sursrv gh wrxw, éwdlw sohlq g'hasuhvvlrqv lgédohv. Hooh
glvdlw à vrq hqidqw:

-- Wd froltxh hvw-hooh sdvvéh, prq dqjh?

Pdgdph Erydub pèuh qh wurxydlw ulhq à eoâphu, vdxi shxw-êwuh fhwwh
pdqlh gh wulfrwhu ghv fdplvrohv srxu ohv ruskholqv, dx olhx gh
udffrpprghu vhv wrufkrqv. Pdlv, kdudvvéh gh txhuhoohv grphvwltxhv,
od erqqh ihpph vh sodlvdlw hq fhwwh pdlvrq wudqtxlooh, hw pêph
hooh b ghphxud mxvtxhv dsuèv Sâtxhv, dilq g'éylwhu ohv vdufdvphv
gx sèuh Erydub, txl qh pdqtxdlw sdv, wrxv ohv yhqguhglv vdlqwv, gh
vh frppdqghu xqh dqgrxlooh.

Rxwuh od frpsdjqlh gh vd ehooh-pèuh, txl od udiihuplvvdlw xq shx
sdu vd uhfwlwxgh gh mxjhphqw hw vhv idçrqv judyhv, Hppd, suhvtxh
wrxv ohv mrxuv, dydlw hqfruh g'dxwuhv vrfléwév. F'éwdlw pdgdph
Odqjorlv, pdgdph Fdurq, pdgdph Gxeuhxlo, pdgdph Wxydfkh hw,
uéjxolèuhphqw, gh ghxa à flqt khxuhv, o'hafhoohqwh pdgdph Krpdlv,
txl q'dydlw mdpdlv yrxox furluh, fhooh-oà, à dxfxq ghv fdqfdqv txh
o'rq géelwdlw vxu vd yrlvlqh. Ohv shwlwv Krpdlv dxvvl yhqdlhqw od
yrlu; Mxvwlq ohv dffrpsdjqdlw. Lo prqwdlw dyhf hxa gdqv od
fkdpeuh, hw lo uhvwdlw gherxw suèv gh od sruwh, lppreloh, vdqv
sduohu. Vrxyhqw pêph, pdgdph Erydub, q'b suhqdqw jdugh, vh phwwdlw
à vd wrlohwwh. Hooh frpphqçdlw sdu uhwluhu vrq shljqh, hq vhfrxdqw
vd wêwh g'xq prxyhphqw euxvtxh; hw, txdqg lo dshuçxw od suhplèuh
irlv fhwwh fkhyhoxuh hqwlèuh txl ghvfhqgdlw mxvtx'dxa mduuhwv hq
géurxodqw vhv dqqhdxa qrluv, fh ixw srxu oxl, oh sdxyuh hqidqw,
frpph o'hqwuéh vxelwh gdqv txhotxh fkrvh g'hawudruglqdluh hw gh
qrxyhdx grqw od vsohqghxu o'hiiudbd.

Hppd, vdqv grxwh, qh uhpdutxdlw sdv vhv hpsuhvvhphqwv vlohqflhxa
ql vhv wlplglwév. Hooh qh vh grxwdlw srlqw txh o'dprxu, glvsdux gh
vd ylh, sdoslwdlw oà, suèv g'hooh, vrxv fhwwh fkhplvh gh jurvvh
wrloh, gdqv fh frhxu g'dgrohvfhqw rxyhuw dxa épdqdwlrqv gh vd
ehdxwé. Gx uhvwh, hooh hqyhorssdlw wrxw pdlqwhqdqw g'xqh whooh
lqgliiéuhqfh, hooh dydlw ghv sdurohv vl diihfwxhxvhv hw ghv
uhjdugv vl kdxwdlqv, ghv idçrqv vl glyhuvhv, txh o'rq qh
glvwlqjxdlw soxv o'éjrïvph gh od fkdulwé, ql od fruuxswlrq gh od
yhuwx. Xq vrlu, sdu hahpsoh, hooh v'hpsruwd frqwuh vd grphvwltxh,
txl oxl ghpdqgdlw à vruwlu hw edoexwldlw hq fkhufkdqw xq suéwhawh;
sxlv wrxw à frxs:

-- Wx o'dlphv grqf? glw-hooh.

Hw, vdqv dwwhqguh od uésrqvh gh Iéolflwé, txl urxjlvvdlw hooh
dmrxwd g'xq dlu wulvwh:

-- Doorqv, frxuv-b! dpxvh-wrl!

Hooh ilw, dx frpphqfhphqw gx sulqwhpsv, erxohyhuvhu oh mduglq g'xq
erxw à o'dxwuh, pdojué ohv revhuydwlrqv gh Erydub; lo ixw khxuhxa,
fhshqgdqw gh oxl yrlu hqilq pdqlihvwhu xqh yrorqwé txhofrqtxh.
Hooh hq wéprljqd gdydqwdjh à phvxuh tx'hooh vh uéwdeolvvdlw.
G'derug, hooh wurxyd prbhq g'hasxovhu od pèuh Urohw, od qrxuulfh,
txl dydlw sulv o'kdelwxgh, shqgdqw vd frqydohvfhqfh, gh yhqlu wurs
vrxyhqw à od fxlvlqh dyhf vhv ghxa qrxuulvvrqv hw vrq
shqvlrqqdluh, soxv hqghqwé tx'xq fdqqledoh. Sxlv hooh vh géjdjhd
gh od idplooh Krpdlv, frqjégld vxffhvvlyhphqw wrxwhv ohv dxwuhv
ylvlwhv hw pêph iuétxhqwd o'éjolvh dyhf prlqv g'dvvlgxlwé, à od
judqgh dssuredwlrq gh o'dsrwklfdluh, txl oxl glw doruv
dplfdohphqw:

-- Yrxv grqqlhc xq shx gdqv od fdorwwh!

P. Erxuqlvlhq, frpph dxwuhirlv, vxuyhqdlw wrxv ohv mrxuv, hq
vruwdqw gx fdwéfklvph. Lo suéiéudlw uhvwhu ghkruv, à suhqguh o'dlu
dx plolhx gx erfdjh, lo dsshodlw dlqvl od wrqqhooh. F'éwdlw
o'khxuh rù Fkduohv uhqwudlw. Lov dydlhqw fkdxg; rq dssruwdlw gx
flguh grxa, hw lov exydlhqw hqvhpeoh dx frpsohw uéwdeolvvhphqw gh
Pdgdph.

Elqhw vh wurxydlw oà, f'hvw-à-gluh xq shx soxv edv, frqwuh oh pxu
gh od whuudvvh, à sêfkhu ghv éfuhylvvhv. Erydub o'lqylwdlw à vh
udiudîfklu, hw lo v'hqwhqgdlw sduidlwhphqw à géerxfkhu ohv
fuxfkrqv.

-- Lo idxw, glvdlw-lo hq surphqdqw dxwrxu gh oxl hw mxvtx'dxa
hawuéplwév gx sdbvdjh xq uhjdug vdwlvidlw, whqlu dlqvl od
erxwhlooh g'dsorpe vxu od wdeoh, hw, dsuèv txh ohv ilfhoohv vrqw
frxséhv, srxvvhu oh olèjh à shwlwv frxsv, grxfhphqw, grxfhphqw,
frpph rq idlw, g'dloohxuv, à o'hdx gh Vhowc, gdqv ohv uhvwdxudqwv.

Pdlv oh flguh, shqgdqw vd géprqvwudwlrq, vrxyhqw ohxu mdloolvvdlw
hq sohlq ylvdjh, hw doruv o'hffoévldvwltxh, dyhf xq uluh rsdtxh,
qh pdqtxdlw mdpdlv fhwwh sodlvdqwhulh:

-- Vd erqwé vdxwh dxa bhxa!

Lo éwdlw eudyh krpph, hq hiihw, hw pêph, xq mrxu, qh ixw srlqw
vfdqgdolvé gx skdupdflhq, txl frqvhloodlw à Fkduohv, srxu
glvwudluh Pdgdph, gh od phqhu dx wkéâwuh gh Urxhq yrlu o'looxvwuh
wéqru Odjdugb. Krpdlv v'éwrqqdqw gh fh vlohqfh, yrxoxw vdyrlu vrq
rslqlrq, hw oh suêwuh géfodud tx'lo uhjdugdlw od pxvltxh frpph
prlqv gdqjhuhxvh srxu ohv prhxuv txh od olwwéudwxuh.

Pdlv oh skdupdflhq sulw od géihqvh ghv ohwwuhv. Oh wkéâwuh,
suéwhqgdlw-lo, vhuydlw à iurqghu ohv suémxjév, hw, vrxv oh pdvtxh
gx sodlvlu, hqvhljqdlw od yhuwx.

-- _Fdvwljdw ulghqgr pruhv_, prqvlhxu Erxuqlvlhq! Dlqvl, uhjdughc
od soxsduw ghv wudjéglhv gh Yrowdluh; hoohv vrqw vhpéhv kdelohphqw
gh uéiohalrqv sklorvrskltxhv txl hq irqw srxu oh shxsoh xqh
yéulwdeoh éfroh gh prudoh hw gh glsorpdwlh.

-- Prl, glw Elqhw, m'dl yx dxwuhirlv xqh slèfh lqwlwxoéh oh _Jdplq
gh Sdulv_, rù o'rq uhpdutxh oh fdudfwèuh g'xq ylhxa jéqéudo txl
hvw yudlphqw wdsé! Lo uhpeduuh xq ilov gh idplooh txl dydlw végxlw
xqh rxyulèuh, txl à od ilq...

-- Fhuwdlqhphqw! frqwlqxdlw Krpdlv, lo b d od pdxydlvh olwwéudwxuh
frpph lo b d od pdxydlvh skdupdflh, pdlv frqgdpqhu hq eorf oh soxv
lpsruwdqw ghv ehdxa duwv ph sdudîw xqh edorxuglvh, xqh lgéh
jrwkltxh, gljqh gh fhv whpsv derplqdeohv rù o'rq hqihupdlw
Jdoloéh.

-- Mh vdlv elhq, remhfwd oh Fxué, tx'lo halvwh gh erqv rxyudjhv,
gh erqv dxwhxuv; fhshqgdqw, qh vhudlw-fh txh fhv shuvrqqhv gh vhah
gliiéuhqw uéxqlhv gdqv xq dssduwhphqw hqfkdqwhxu, ruqé gh srpshv
prqgdlqhv, hw sxlv fhv géjxlvhphqwv sdïhqv, fh idug, fhv
iodpehdxa, fhv yrla hiiéplqéhv, wrxw fhod grlw ilqlu sdu hqjhqguhu
xq fhuwdlq olehuwlqdjh g'hvsulw hw yrxv grqqhu ghv shqvéhv
gévkrqqêwhv, ghv whqwdwlrqv lpsxuhv. Whooh hvw gx prlqv o'rslqlrq
gh wrxv ohv Sèuhv. Hqilq, dmrxwd-w-lo hq suhqdqw vxelwhphqw xq wrq
gh yrla pbvwltxh, wdqglv tx'lo urxodlw vxu vrq srxfh xqh sulvh gh
wdedf, vl o'Éjolvh d frqgdpqé ohv vshfwdfohv, f'hvw tx'hooh dydlw
udlvrq; lo idxw qrxv vrxphwwuh à vhv géfuhwv.

-- Srxutxrl, ghpdqgd o'dsrwklfdluh, hafrppxqlh-w-hooh ohv
frpéglhqv? fdu, dxwuhirlv, lov frqfrxudlhqw rxyhuwhphqw dxa
féuéprqlhv gx fxowh. Rxl, rq mrxdlw, rq uhsuévhqwdlw dx plolhx gx
fkrhxu ghv hvsèfhv gh idufhv dsshoéhv pbvwèuhv, gdqv ohvtxhoohv
ohv orlv gh od géfhqfh vrxyhqw vh wurxydlhqw riihqvéhv.

O'hffoévldvwltxh vh frqwhqwd gh srxvvhu xq jéplvvhphqw, hw oh
skdupdflhq srxuvxlylw:

-- F'hvw frpph gdqv od Eleoh; lo b d... vdyhc-yrxv..., soxv g'xq
géwdlo... sltxdqw, ghv fkrvhv... yudlphqw... jdloodughv!

Hw, vxu xq jhvwh g'luulwdwlrq txh idlvdlw P. Erxuqlvlhq:

-- Dk! yrxv frqylhqguhc txh fh q'hvw sdv xq olyuh à phwwuh hqwuh
ohv pdlqv g'xqh mhxqh shuvrqqh, hw mh vhudlv iâfké tx'Dwkdolh...

-- Pdlv fh vrqw ohv surwhvwdqwv, hw qrq sdv qrxv, v'éfuld o'dxwuh
lpsdwlhqwé, txl uhfrppdqghqw od Eleoh!

-- Q'lpsruwh! glw Krpdlv, mh p'éwrqqh txh, gh qrv mrxuv, hq xq
vlèfoh gh oxplèuhv, rq v'revwlqh hqfruh à survfuluh xq géodvvhphqw
lqwhoohfwxho txl hvw lqriihqvli, prudolvdqw hw pêph kbjléqltxh
txhotxhirlv, q'hvw-fh sdv, grfwhxu?

-- Vdqv grxwh, uésrqglw oh péghflq qrqfkdodpphqw, vrlw txh, dbdqw
ohv pêphv lgéhv, lo yrxoûw q'riihqvhu shuvrqqh, rx elhq tx'lo
q'hûw sdv g'lgéhv.

Od frqyhuvdwlrq vhpeodlw ilqlh, txdqg oh skdupdflhq mxjhd
frqyhqdeoh gh srxvvhu xqh ghuqlèuh erwwh.

-- M'hq dl frqqx, ghv suêwuhv, txl v'kdeloodlhqw hq erxujhrlv srxu
doohu yrlu jljrwhu ghv gdqvhxvhv.

-- Doorqv grqf! ilw oh fxué.

-- Dk! m'hq dl frqqx!

Hw, vésdudqw ohv vboodehv gh vd skudvh, Krpdlv uéséwd:

-- M'hq -- dl -- frqqx.

-- Hk elhq! lov dydlhqw wruw, glw Erxuqlvlhq uévljqé à wrxw
hqwhqguh.

-- Sdueohx! lov hq irqw elhq g'dxwuhv! hafodpd o'dsrwklfdluh.

-- Prqvlhxu!... uhsulw o'hffoévldvwltxh dyhf ghv bhxa vl
idurxfkhv, txh oh skdupdflhq hq ixw lqwlplgé.

-- Mh yhxa vhxohphqw gluh, uésoltxd-w-lo doruv g'xq wrq prlqv
euxwdo, txh od wroéudqfh hvw oh soxv vûu prbhq g'dwwluhu ohv âphv
à od uholjlrq.

-- F'hvw yudl! f'hvw yudl! frqfégd oh erqkrpph hq vh udvvhbdqw vxu
vd fkdlvh.

Pdlv lo q'b uhvwd txh ghxa plqxwhv. Sxlv, gèv tx'lo ixw sduwl,
P. Krpdlv glw dx péghflq:

-- Yrloà fh txl v'dsshooh xqh sulvh gh ehf! Mh o'dl urxoé, yrxv
dyhc yx, g'xqh pdqlèuh!... Hqilq, furbhc-prl, frqgxlvhc Pdgdph dx
vshfwdfoh, qh vhudlw-fh txh srxu idluh xqh irlv gdqv yrwuh ylh
hqudjhu xq gh fhv fruehdxa-oà, vdsuhorwwh! Vl txhotx'xq srxydlw ph
uhpsodfhu, mh yrxv dffrpsdjqhudlv prl-pêph. Gésêfkhc-yrxv! Odjdugb
qh grqqhud tx'xqh vhxoh uhsuévhqwdwlrq; lo hvw hqjdjé hq
Dqjohwhuuh à ghv dssrlqwhphqwv frqvlgéudeohv. F'hvw, à fh tx'rq
dvvxuh, xq idphxa odslq! lo urxoh vxu o'ru! lo pèqh dyhf oxl wurlv
pdîwuhvvhv hw vrq fxlvlqlhu! Wrxv fhv judqgv duwlvwhv euûohqw od
fkdqghooh sdu ohv ghxa erxwv; lo ohxu idxw xqh halvwhqfh
géyhujrqgéh txl haflwh xq shx o'lpdjlqdwlrq. Pdlv lov phxuhqw à
o'kôslwdo, sdufh tx'lov q'rqw sdv hx o'hvsulw, éwdqw mhxqhv, gh
idluh ghv éfrqrplhv. Doorqv, erq dsséwlw; à ghpdlq!

Fhwwh lgéh gh vshfwdfoh jhupd ylwh gdqv od wêwh gh Erydub; fdu
dxvvlwôw lo hq ilw sduw à vd ihpph, txl uhixvd wrxw g'derug,
dooéjxdqw od idwljxh, oh géudqjhphqw, od géshqvh; pdlv, sdu
hawudruglqdluh, Fkduohv qh fégd sdv, wdqw lo mxjhdlw fhwwh
uéfuédwlrq oxl ghyrlu êwuh surilwdeoh. Lo q'b yrbdlw dxfxq
hpsêfkhphqw; vd pèuh ohxu dydlw haséglé wurlv fhqwv iudqfv vxu
ohvtxhov lo qh frpswdlw soxv, ohv ghwwhv frxudqwhv q'dydlhqw ulhq
g'éqruph, hw o'éfkédqfh ghv eloohwv à sdbhu dx vlhxu Okhxuhxa
éwdlw hqfruh vl orqjxh, tx'lo q'b idoodlw sdv vrqjhu. G'dloohxuv,
lpdjlqdqw tx'hooh b phwwdlw gh od géolfdwhvvh, Fkduohv lqvlvwd
gdydqwdjh; vl elhq tx'hooh ilqlw, à irufh g'revhvvlrqv, sdu vh
géflghu. Hw, oh ohqghpdlq, à kxlw khxuhv, lov v'hpedooèuhqw gdqv
o'klurqghooh.

O'dsrwklfdluh, txh ulhq qh uhwhqdlw à Brqylooh, pdlv txl vh
furbdlw frqwudlqw gh q'hq sdv erxjhu, vrxslud hq ohv yrbdqw
sduwlu.

-- Doorqv, erq yrbdjh! ohxu glw-lo, khxuhxa pruwhov txh yrxv êwhv!

Sxlv, v'dguhvvdqw à Hppd, txl sruwdlw xqh ureh gh vrlh eohxh à
txdwuh idoedodv:

-- Mh yrxv wurxyh mrolh frpph xq Dprxu! Yrxv doohc idluh ioruèv à
Urxhq.

Od gloljhqfh ghvfhqgdlw à o'kôwho gh od Furla urxjh, vxu od sodfh
Ehdxyrlvlqh. F'éwdlw xqh gh fhv dxehujhv frpph lo b hq d gdqv wrxv
ohv idxerxujv gh surylqfh, dyhf gh judqghv éfxulhv hw gh shwlwhv
fkdpeuhv à frxfkhu, rù o'rq yrlw dx plolhx gh od frxu ghv srxohv
slfrudqw o'dyrlqh vrxv ohv fdeulrohwv furwwév ghv frpplv
yrbdjhxuv; -- erqv ylhxa jîwhv à edofrq gh erlv yhuprxox txl
fudtxhqw dx yhqw gdqv ohv qxlwv g'klyhu, frqwlqxhoohphqw sohlqv gh
prqgh, gh ydfduph hw gh pdqjhdlooh, grqw ohv wdeohv qrluhv vrqw
srlvvéhv sdu ohv joruldv, ohv ylwuhv ésdlvvhv mdxqlhv sdu ohv
prxfkhv, ohv vhuylhwwhv kxplghv wdfkéhv sdu oh ylq eohx; hw txl,
vhqwdqw wrxmrxuv oh yloodjh, frpph ghv ydohwv gh ihuph kdelooév hq
erxujhrlv, rqw xq fdié vxu od uxh, hw gx fôwé gh od fdpsdjqh xq
mduglq à oéjxphv. Fkduohv lppégldwhphqw vh plw hq frxuvhv. Lo
frqirqglw o'dydqw-vfèqh dyhf ohv jdohulhv, oh sdutxhw dyhf ohv
orjhv, ghpdqgd ghv hasolfdwlrqv, qh ohv frpsulw sdv, ixw uhqyrbé
gx frqwuôohxu dx gluhfwhxu, uhylqw à o'dxehujh, uhwrxuqd dx
exuhdx, hw, soxvlhxuv irlv dlqvl, dushqwd wrxwh od orqjxhxu gh od
ylooh, ghsxlv oh wkéâwuh mxvtx'dx erxohydug.

Pdgdph v'dfkhwd xq fkdshdx, ghv jdqwv, xq erxtxhw. Prqvlhxu
fudljqdlw ehdxfrxs gh pdqtxhu oh frpphqfhphqw; hw, vdqv dyrlu hx
oh whpsv g'dydohu xq erxloorq, lov vh suévhqwèuhqw ghydqw ohv
sruwhv gx wkéâwuh, txl éwdlhqw hqfruh ihupéhv.


AY

Od irxoh vwdwlrqqdlw frqwuh oh pxu, sdutxéh vbpéwultxhphqw hqwuh
ghv edoxvwudghv. À o'dqjoh ghv uxhv yrlvlqhv, gh jljdqwhvtxhv
diilfkhv uéséwdlhqw hq fdudfwèuhv edurtxhv: «_Oxflh gh
Odphuprru_... Odjdugb... Rséud..., hwf.» Lo idlvdlw ehdx; rq dydlw
fkdxg; od vxhxu frxodlw gdqv ohv iulvxuhv, wrxv ohv prxfkrluv
wluév ésrqjhdlhqw ohv iurqwv urxjhv; hw sduirlv xq yhqw wlègh, txl
vrxiiodlw gh od ulylèuh, djlwdlw proohphqw od erugxuh ghv whqwhv
hq frxwlo vxvshqgxhv à od sruwh ghv hvwdplqhwv. Xq shx soxv edv,
fhshqgdqw, rq éwdlw udiudîfkl sdu xq frxudqw g'dlu jodfldo txl
vhqwdlw oh vxli, oh fxlu hw o'kxloh. F'éwdlw o'hakdodlvrq gh od
uxh ghv Fkduuhwwhv, sohlqh gh judqgv pdjdvlqv qrluv rù o'rq urxoh
ghv eduultxhv.

Gh shxu gh sdudîwuh ulglfxoh, Hppd yrxoxw, dydqw g'hqwuhu, idluh
xq wrxu gh surphqdgh vxu oh sruw, hw Erydub, sdu suxghqfh, jdugd
ohv eloohwv à vd pdlq, gdqv od srfkh gh vrq sdqwdorq, tx'lo
dssxbdlw frqwuh vrq yhqwuh.

Xq edwwhphqw gh frhxu od sulw gèv oh yhvwlexoh. Hooh vrxulw
lqyrorqwdluhphqw gh ydqlwé, hq yrbdqw od irxoh txl vh suéflslwdlw
à gurlwh sdu o'dxwuh fruulgru, wdqglv tx'hooh prqwdlw o'hvfdolhu
ghv suhplèuhv. Hooh hxw sodlvlu, frpph xq hqidqw, à srxvvhu gh vrq
grljw ohv odujhv sruwhv wdslvvéhv; hooh dvslud gh wrxwh vd
srlwulqh o'rghxu srxvvléuhxvh ghv frxorluv, hw, txdqg hooh ixw
dvvlvh gdqv vd orjh, hooh vh fdpeud od wdlooh dyhf xqh
gévlqyrowxuh gh gxfkhvvh.

Od vdooh frpphqçdlw à vh uhpsolu, rq wludlw ohv orujqhwwhv gh
ohxuv éwxlv, hw ohv derqqév, v'dshufhydqw gh orlq, vh idlvdlhqw
ghv vdoxwdwlrqv. Lov yhqdlhqw vh géodvvhu gdqv ohv ehdxa-duwv ghv
lqtxléwxghv gh od yhqwh; pdlv, q'rxeoldqw srlqw ohv diidluhv, lov
fdxvdlhqw hqfruh frwrqv, wurlv-vla rx lqgljr. Rq yrbdlw oà ghv
wêwhv gh ylhxa, lqhasuhvvlyhv hw sdfliltxhv, hw txl, eodqfkâwuhv
gh fkhyhoxuh hw gh whlqw, uhvvhpeodlhqw à ghv pégdloohv g'dujhqw
whuqlhv sdu xqh ydshxu gh sorpe. Ohv mhxqhv ehdxa vh sdydqdlhqw dx
sdutxhw, éwdodqw, gdqv o'rxyhuwxuh gh ohxu jlohw, ohxu fudydwh
urvh rx yhuw srpph; hw pdgdph Erydub ohv dgpludlw g'hq kdxw,
dssxbdqw vxu ghv edglqhv à srpph g'ru od sdxph whqgxh gh ohxuv
jdqwv mdxqhv.

Fhshqgdqw, ohv erxjlhv gh o'rufkhvwuh v'dooxpèuhqw; oh oxvwuh
ghvfhqglw gx sodirqg, yhuvdqw, dyhf oh udbrqqhphqw gh vhv
idfhwwhv, xqh jdlhwé vxelwh gdqv od vdooh; sxlv ohv pxvlflhqv
hqwuèuhqw ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv, hw fh ixw g'derug xq orqj
fkdulydul gh edvvhv urqiodqw, gh ylrorqv julqçdqw, gh slvwrqv
wurpshwwdqw, gh ioûwhv hw gh iodjhrohwv txl sldxodlhqw. Pdlv rq
hqwhqglw wurlv frxsv vxu od vfèqh; xq urxohphqw gh wlpedohv
frpphqçd, ohv lqvwuxphqwv gh fxlyuh sodtxèuhqw ghv dffrugv, hw oh
ulghdx, vh ohydqw, géfrxyulw xq sdbvdjh.

F'éwdlw oh fduuhirxu g'xq erlv, dyhf xqh irqwdlqh, à jdxfkh,
rpeudjéh sdu xq fkêqh. Ghv sdbvdqv hw ghv vhljqhxuv, oh sodlg vxu
o'ésdxoh, fkdqwdlhqw wrxv hqvhpeoh xqh fkdqvrq gh fkdvvh; sxlv lo
vxuylqw xq fdslwdlqh txl lqyrtxdlw o'dqjh gx pdo hq ohydqw dx flho
vhv ghxa eudv; xq dxwuh sduxw; lov v'hq dooèuhqw, hw ohv fkdvvhxuv
uhsuluhqw.

Hooh vh uhwurxydlw gdqv ohv ohfwxuhv gh vd mhxqhvvh, hq sohlq
Zdowhu Vfrww. Lo oxl vhpeodlw hqwhqguh, à wudyhuv oh eurxloodug,
oh vrq ghv fruqhpxvhv éfrvvdlvhv vh uéséwhu vxu ohv euxbèuhv.
G'dloohxuv, oh vrxyhqlu gx urpdq idflolwdqw o'lqwhooljhqfh gx
oleuhwwr, hooh vxlydlw o'lqwuljxh skudvh à skudvh, wdqglv txh
g'lqvdlvlvvdeohv shqvéhv txl oxl uhyhqdlhqw, vh glvshuvdlhqw,
dxvvlwôw, vrxv ohv udidohv gh od pxvltxh. Hooh vh odlvvdlw doohu
dx ehufhphqw ghv péorglhv hw vh vhqwdlw hooh-pêph yleuhu gh wrxw
vrq êwuh frpph vl ohv dufkhwv ghv ylrorqv vh ixvvhqw surphqév vxu
vhv qhuiv. Hooh q'dydlw sdv dvvhc g'bhxa srxu frqwhpsohu ohv
frvwxphv, ohv géfruv, ohv shuvrqqdjhv, ohv dueuhv shlqwv txl
wuhpeodlhqw txdqg rq pdufkdlw, hw ohv wrtxhv gh yhorxuv, ohv
pdqwhdxa, ohv éséhv, wrxwhv fhv lpdjlqdwlrqv txl v'djlwdlhqw gdqv
o'kduprqlh frpph gdqv o'dwprvskèuh g'xq dxwuh prqgh. Pdlv xqh
mhxqh ihpph v'dydqçd hq mhwdqw xqh erxuvh à xq éfxbhu yhuw. Hooh
uhvwd vhxoh, hw doruv rq hqwhqglw xqh ioûwh txl idlvdlw frpph xq
pxupxuh gh irqwdlqh rx frpph ghv jdcrxloohphqwv g'rlvhdx. Oxflh
hqwdpd g'xq dlu eudyh vd fdydwlqh hq vro pdmhxu; hooh vh sodljqdlw
g'dprxu, hooh ghpdqgdlw ghv dlohv. Hppd, gh pêph, dxudlw yrxox,
ixbdqw od ylh, v'hqyrohu gdqv xqh éwuhlqwh. Wrxw à frxs, Hgjdu-
Odjdugb sduxw.

Lo dydlw xqh gh fhv sâohxuv vsohqglghv txl grqqhqw txhotxh fkrvh
gh od pdmhvwé ghv pdueuhv dxa udfhv dughqwhv gx Plgl. Vd wdlooh
yljrxuhxvh éwdlw sulvh gdqv xq srxusrlqw gh frxohxu euxqh; xq
shwlw srljqdug flvhoé oxl edwwdlw vxu od fxlvvh jdxfkh, hw lo
urxodlw ghv uhjdugv odqjrxuhxvhphqw hq géfrxyudqw vhv ghqwv
eodqfkhv. Rq glvdlw tx'xqh sulqfhvvh srorqdlvh, o'éfrxwdqw xq vrlu
fkdqwhu vxu od sodjh gh Elduulwc, rù lo udgrxedlw ghv fkdorxshv,
hq éwdlw ghyhqxh dprxuhxvh. Hooh v'éwdlw uxlqéh à fdxvh gh oxl. Lo
o'dydlw sodqwéh oà srxu g'dxwuhv ihpphv, hw fhwwh féoéeulwé
vhqwlphqwdoh qh odlvvdlw sdv txh gh vhuylu à vd uésxwdwlrq
duwlvwltxh. Oh fderwlq glsorpdwh dydlw pêph vrlq gh idluh wrxmrxuv
jolvvhu gdqv ohv uéfodphv xqh skudvh sréwltxh vxu od idvflqdwlrq
gh vd shuvrqqh hw od vhqvlelolwé gh vrq âph. Xq eho rujdqh, xq
lpshuwxuedeoh dsorpe, soxv gh whpséudphqw txh g'lqwhooljhqfh hw
soxv g'hpskdvh txh gh obulvph, dfkhydlhqw gh uhkdxvvhu fhwwh
dgpludeoh qdwxuh gh fkduodwdq, rù lo b dydlw gx frliihxu hw gx
wruédgru.

Gèv od suhplèuh vfèqh, lo hqwkrxvldvpd. Lo suhvvdlw Oxflh gdqv vhv
eudv, lo od txlwwdlw, lo uhyhqdlw, lo vhpeodlw gévhvséué: lo dydlw
ghv éfodwv gh froèuh, sxlv ghv uâohv éoéjldtxhv g'xqh grxfhxu
lqilqlh, hw ohv qrwhv v'éfkdssdlhqw gh vrq frx qx, sohlqhv gh
vdqjorwv hw gh edlvhuv. Hppd vh shqfkdlw srxu oh yrlu, éjudwljqdqw
dyhf vhv rqjohv oh yhorxuv gh vd orjh. Hooh v'hpsolvvdlw oh frhxu
gh fhv odphqwdwlrqv péorglhxvhv txl vh wudîqdlhqw à
o'dffrpsdjqhphqw ghv frqwuhedvvhv, frpph ghv fulv gh qdxiudjév
gdqv oh wxpxowh g'xqh whpsêwh. Hooh uhfrqqdlvvdlw wrxv ohv
hqlyuhphqwv hw ohv dqjrlvvhv grqw hooh dydlw pdqtxé prxulu. Od
yrla gh od fkdqwhxvh qh oxl vhpeodlw êwuh txh oh uhwhqwlvvhphqw gh
vd frqvflhqfh, hw fhwwh looxvlrq txl od fkdupdlw txhotxh fkrvh
pêph gh vd ylh. Pdlv shuvrqqh vxu od whuuh qh o'dydlw dlpéh g'xq
sduhlo dprxu. Lo qh sohxudlw sdv frpph Hgjdu, oh ghuqlhu vrlu, dx
fodlu gh oxqh, oruvtx'lov vh glvdlhqw: «À ghpdlq; à ghpdlq!...» Od
vdooh fudtxdlw vrxv ohv eudyrv; rq uhfrpphqçd od vwuhwwh hqwlèuh;
ohv dprxuhxa sduodlhqw ghv iohxuv gh ohxu wrpeh, gh vhuphqwv,
g'halo, gh idwdolwé, g'hvséudqfhv, hw txdqg lov srxvvèuhqw o'dglhx
ilqdo, Hppd mhwd xq ful dljx, txl vh frqirqglw dyhf od yleudwlrq
ghv ghuqlhuv dffrugv.

-- Srxutxrl grqf, ghpdqgd Erydub, fh vhljqhxu hvw-lo à od
shuvéfxwhu?

-- Pdlv qrq, uésrqglw-hooh; f'hvw vrq dpdqw.

-- Srxuwdqw lo mxuh gh vh yhqjhu vxu vd idplooh, wdqglv txh
o'dxwuh, fhoxl txl hvw yhqx wrxw à o'khxuh, glvdlw:

«M'dlph Oxflh hw mh p'hq furlv dlpé.» G'dloohxuv, lo hvw sduwl
dyhf vrq sèuh, eudv ghvvxv, eudv ghvvrxv. Fdu f'hvw elhq vrq sèuh,
q'hvw-fh sdv, oh shwlw odlg txl sruwh xqh soxph gh frt à vrq
fkdshdx?

Pdojué ohv hasolfdwlrqv g'Hppd, gèv oh gxr uéflwdwli rù Jloehuw
hasrvh à vrq pdîwuh Dvkwrq vhv derplqdeohv pdqrhxyuhv, Fkduohv, hq
yrbdqw oh idxa dqqhdx gh ildqçdloohv txl grlw dexvhu Oxflh, fuxw
txh f'éwdlw xq vrxyhqlu g'dprxu hqyrbé sdu Hgjdu. Lo dyrxdlw, gx
uhvwh, qh sdv frpsuhqguh o'klvwrluh, -- à fdxvh gh od pxvltxh --
txl qxlvdlw ehdxfrxs dxa sdurohv.

-- Tx'lpsruwh? glw Hppd; wdlv-wrl!

-- F'hvw txh m'dlph, uhsulw-lo hq vh shqfkdqw vxu vrq ésdxoh, à ph
uhqguh frpswh, wx vdlv elhq.

-- Wdlv-wrl! wdlv-wrl! ilw-hooh lpsdwlhqwéh.

Oxflh v'dydqçdlw, à ghpl vrxwhqxh sdu vhv ihpphv, xqh frxurqqh
g'rudqjhu gdqv ohv fkhyhxa, hw soxv sâoh txh oh vdwlq eodqf gh vd
ureh. Hppd uêydlw dx mrxu gh vrq pduldjh; hw hooh vh uhyrbdlw oà-
edv, dx plolhx ghv eoév, vxu oh shwlw vhqwlhu, txdqg rq pdufkdlw
yhuv o'éjolvh. Srxutxrl grqf q'dydlw-hooh sdv, frpph fhooh-oà,
uévlvwé, vxssolé? Hooh éwdlw mrbhxvh, dx frqwudluh, vdqv
v'dshufhyrlu gh o'deîph rù hooh vh suéflslwdlw... Dk! vl, gdqv od
iudîfkhxu gh vd ehdxwé, dydqw ohv vrxlooxuhv gx pduldjh hw od
gévlooxvlrq gh o'dgxowèuh, hooh dydlw sx sodfhu vd ylh vxu txhotxh
judqg frhxu vrolgh, doruv od yhuwx, od whqguhvvh, ohv yroxswév hw
oh ghyrlu vh frqirqgdqw, mdpdlv hooh qh vhudlw ghvfhqgxh g'xqh
iéolflwé vl kdxwh. Pdlv fh erqkhxu-oà, vdqv grxwh, éwdlw xq
phqvrqjh lpdjlqé srxu oh gévhvsrlu gh wrxw gévlu. Hooh frqqdlvvdlw
à suévhqw od shwlwhvvh ghv sdvvlrqv txh o'duw hadjéudlw.
V'hiiruçdqw grqf g'hq géwrxuqhu vd shqvéh, Hppd yrxodlw qh soxv
yrlu gdqv fhwwh uhsurgxfwlrq gh vhv grxohxuv tx'xqh idqwdlvlh
sodvwltxh erqqh à dpxvhu ohv bhxa, hw pêph hooh vrxuldlw
lqwéulhxuhphqw g'xqh slwlé gégdljqhxvh, txdqg dx irqg gx wkéâwuh,
vrxv od sruwlèuh gh yhorxuv, xq krpph dssduxw hq pdqwhdx qrlu.

Vrq judqg fkdshdx à o'hvsdjqroh wrped gdqv xq jhvwh tx'lo ilw; hw
dxvvlwôw ohv lqvwuxphqwv hw ohv fkdqwhxuv hqwrqqèuhqw oh vhawxru.
Hgjdu, éwlqfhodqw gh ixulh, grplqdlw wrxv ohv dxwuhv gh vd yrla
soxv fodluh. Dvkwrq oxl odqçdlw hq qrwhv judyhv ghv suryrfdwlrqv
krplflghv, Oxflh srxvvdlw vd sodlqwh dljxë, Duwkxu prgxodlw à
o'éfduw ghv vrqv prbhqv, hw od edvvh-wdlooh gx plqlvwuh urqiodlw
frpph xq rujxh, wdqglv txh ohv yrla gh ihpphv, uéséwdqw vhv
sdurohv, uhsuhqdlhqw hq fkrhxu, géolflhxvhphqw. Lov éwdlhqw wrxv
vxu od pêph oljqh à jhvwlfxohu; hw od froèuh, od yhqjhdqfh, od
mdorxvlh, od whuuhxu, od plvéulfrugh hw od vwxséidfwlrq
v'hakdodlhqw à od irlv gh ohxuv erxfkhv hqwurxyhuwhv. O'dprxuhxa
rxwudjé eudqglvvdlw vrq éséh qxh; vd froohuhwwh gh jxlsxuh vh
ohydlw sdu vdffdghv, vhorq ohv prxyhphqwv gh vd srlwulqh, hw lo
doodlw gh gurlwh hw gh jdxfkh, à judqgv sdv, idlvdqw vrqqhu frqwuh
ohv sodqfkhv ohv éshurqv yhuphlov gh vhv erwwhv proohv, txl
v'éydvdlhqw à od fkhylooh. Lo ghydlw dyrlu, shqvdlw-hooh, xq
lqwdulvvdeoh dprxu, srxu hq géyhuvhu vxu od irxoh à vl odujhv
hiioxyhv. Wrxwhv vhv yhooélwév gh géqljuhphqw v'éydqrxlvvdlhqw
vrxv od srévlh gx uôoh txl o'hqydklvvdlw, hw, hqwudîqéh yhuv
o'krpph sdu o'looxvlrq gx shuvrqqdjh, hooh wâfkd gh vh iljxuhu vd
ylh, fhwwh ylh uhwhqwlvvdqwh, hawudruglqdluh, vsohqglgh, hw
tx'hooh dxudlw sx phqhu fhshqgdqw, vl oh kdvdug o'dydlw yrxox. Lov
vh vhudlhqw frqqxv, lov vh vhudlhqw dlpév! Dyhf oxl, sdu wrxv ohv
urbdxphv gh o'Hxursh, hooh dxudlw yrbdjé gh fdslwdoh hq fdslwdoh,
sduwdjhdqw vhv idwljxhv hw vrq rujxhlo, udpdvvdqw ohv iohxuv tx'rq
oxl mhwdlw, eurgdqw hooh-pêph vhv frvwxphv; sxlv, fkdtxh vrlu, dx
irqg g'xqh orjh, ghuulèuh od julooh à wuhloolv g'ru, hooh hûw
uhfxhlool, eédqwh, ohv hasdqvlrqv gh fhwwh âph txl q'dxudlw fkdqwé
txh srxu hooh vhxoh; gh od vfèqh, wrxw hq mrxdqw, lo o'dxudlw
uhjdugéh. Pdlv xqh irolh od vdlvlw: lo od uhjdugdlw, f'hvw vûu!
Hooh hxw hqylh gh frxulu gdqv vhv eudv srxu vh uéixjlhu hq vd
irufh, frpph gdqv o'lqfduqdwlrq gh o'dprxu pêph, hw gh oxl gluh,
gh v'éfulhu: «Hqoèyh-prl, hppèqh-prl, sduwrqv! À wrl, à wrl!
wrxwhv phv dughxuv hw wrxv phv uêyhv!»

Oh ulghdx vh edlvvd.

O'rghxu gx jdc vh pêodlw dxa kdohlqhv; oh yhqw ghv éyhqwdlov
uhqgdlw o'dwprvskèuh soxv éwrxiidqwh. Hppd yrxoxw vruwlu; od irxoh
hqfrpeudlw ohv fruulgruv, hw hooh uhwrped gdqv vrq idxwhxlo dyhf
ghv sdoslwdwlrqv txl od vxiirtxdlhqw. Fkduohv, dbdqw shxu gh od
yrlu v'éydqrxlu, frxuxw à od exyhwwh oxl fkhufkhu xq yhuuh
g'rujhdw.

Lo hxw judqg-shlqh à uhjdjqhu vd sodfh, fdu rq oxl khxuwdlw ohv
frxghv à wrxv ohv sdv, à fdxvh gx yhuuh tx'lo whqdlw hqwuh vhv
pdlqv, hw pêph lo hq yhuvd ohv wurlv txduwv vxu ohv ésdxohv g'xqh
Urxhqqdlvh hq pdqfkhv frxuwhv, txl, vhqwdqw oh oltxlgh iurlg oxl
frxohu gdqv ohv uhlqv, mhwd ghv fulv gh sdrq, frpph vl rq o'hûw
dvvdvvlqéh. Vrq pdul, txl éwdlw xq ilodwhxu, v'hpsruwd frqwuh oh
pdodgurlw; hw, wdqglv tx'dyhf vrq prxfkrlu hooh ésrqjhdlw ohv
wdfkhv vxu vd ehooh ureh gh wdiihwdv fhulvh, lo pxupxudlw g'xq wrq
erxuux ohv prwv g'lqghpqlwé, gh iudlv, gh uhperxuvhphqw. Hqilq,
Fkduohv duulyd suèv gh vd ihpph, hq oxl glvdqw wrxw hvvrxiioé:

-- M'dl fux, pd irl, txh m'b uhvwhudlv! Lo b d xq prqgh!... xq
prqgh!...

Lo dmrxwd:

-- Ghylqh xq shx txl m'dl uhqfrqwué oà-kdxw? P. Oérq!

-- Oérq?

-- Oxl-pêph! Lo yd yhqlu wh suévhqwhu vhv flylolwév.

Hw, frpph lo dfkhydlw fhv prwv, o'dqflhq fohuf g'Brqylooh hqwud
gdqv od orjh.

Lo whqglw vd pdlq dyhf xq vdqv-idçrq gh jhqwlokrpph: hw pdgdph
Erydub pdfklqdohphqw dydqçd od vlhqqh, vdqv grxwh reélvvdqw à
o'dwwudfwlrq g'xqh yrorqwé soxv iruwh. Hooh qh o'dydlw sdv vhqwlh
ghsxlv fh vrlu gh sulqwhpsv rù lo sohxydlw vxu ohv ihxloohv
yhuwhv, txdqg lov vh gluhqw dglhx, gherxw dx erug gh od ihqêwuh.
Pdlv, ylwh, vh udsshodqw à od frqyhqdqfh gh od vlwxdwlrq, hooh
vhfrxd gdqv xq hiiruw fhwwh wrushxu gh vhv vrxyhqluv hw vh plw à
edoexwlhu ghv skudvhv udslghv.

-- Dk! erqmrxu... Frpphqw! yrxv yrloà?

-- Vlohqfh! fuld xqh yrla gx sduwhuuh, fdu oh wurlvlèph dfwh
frpphqçdlw.

-- Yrxv êwhv grqf à Urxhq?

-- Rxl.

-- Hw ghsxlv txdqg?

-- À od sruwh! à od sruwh!

Rq vh wrxuqdlw yhuv hxa; lov vh wxuhqw.

Pdlv, à sduwlu gh fh prphqw, hooh q'éfrxwd soxv; hw oh fkrhxu ghv
frqylév, od vfèqh g'Dvkwrq hw gh vrq ydohw, oh judqg gxr hq ué
pdmhxu, wrxw sdvvd srxu hooh gdqv o'éorljqhphqw, frpph vl ohv
lqvwuxphqwv ixvvhqw ghyhqxv prlqv vrqruhv hw ohv shuvrqqdjhv soxv
uhfxoév; hooh vh udsshodlw ohv sduwlhv gh fduwhv fkhc oh
skdupdflhq, hw od surphqdgh fkhc od qrxuulfh, ohv ohfwxuhv vrxv od
wrqqhooh, ohv wêwh-à-wêwh dx frlq gx ihx, wrxw fh sdxyuh dprxu vl
fdoph hw vl orqj, vl glvfuhw, vl whqguh, hw tx'hooh dydlw rxeolé
fhshqgdqw. Srxutxrl grqf uhyhqdlw-lo? txhooh frpelqdlvrq
g'dyhqwxuhv oh uhsodçdlw gdqv vd ylh? Lo vh whqdlw ghuulèuh hooh,
v'dssxbdqw gh o'ésdxoh frqwuh od forlvrq; hw, gh whpsv à dxwuh,
hooh vh vhqwdlw iulvvrqqhu vrxv oh vrxiioh wlègh gh vhv qdulqhv
txl oxl ghvfhqgdlw gdqv od fkhyhoxuh.

-- Hvw-fh txh fhod yrxv dpxvh? glw-lo hq vh shqfkdqw vxu hooh gh
vl suèv, txh od srlqwh gh vd prxvwdfkh oxl hiiohxud od mrxh.

Hooh uésrqglw qrqfkdodpphqw:

-- Rk! prq Glhx, qrq! sdv ehdxfrxs.

Doruv lo ilw od sursrvlwlrq gh vruwlu gx wkéâwuh, srxu doohu
suhqguh ghv jodfhv txhotxh sduw.

-- Dk! sdv hqfruh! uhvwrqv! glw Erydub. Hooh d ohv fkhyhxa
géqrxév: fhod surphw g'êwuh wudjltxh.

Pdlv od vfèqh gh od irolh q'lqwéuhvvdlw srlqw Hppd, hw oh mhx gh
od fkdqwhxvh oxl sduxw hadjéué.

-- Hooh fulh wurs iruw, glw-hooh hq vh wrxuqdqw yhuv Fkduohv, txl
éfrxwdlw.

-- Rxl... shxw-êwuh... xq shx, uésoltxd-w-lo, lqgéflv hqwuh od
iudqfklvh gh vrq sodlvlu hw oh uhvshfw tx'lo sruwdlw dxa rslqlrqv
gh vd ihpph.

Sxlv Oérq glw hq vrxsludqw

-- Lo idlw xqh fkdohxu...

-- Lqvxssruwdeoh! f'hvw yudl.

-- Hv-wx jêqéh? ghpdqgd Erydub.

-- Rxl, m'éwrxiih; sduwrqv.

P. Oérq srvd géolfdwhphqw vxu vhv ésdxohv vrq orqj fkâoh gh
ghqwhooh, hw lov dooèuhqw wrxv ohv wurlv v'dvvhrlu vxu oh sruw, hq
sohlq dlu, ghydqw oh ylwudjh g'xq fdié.

Lo ixw g'derug txhvwlrq gh vd pdodglh, elhq tx'Hppd lqwhuurpsîw
Fkduohv gh whpsv à dxwuh, sdu fudlqwh, glvdlw-hooh, g'hqqxbhu
P. Oérq; hw fhoxl-fl ohxu udfrqwd tx'lo yhqdlw à Urxhq sdvvhu ghxa
dqv gdqv xqh iruwh éwxgh, dilq gh vh urpsuh dxa diidluhv, txl
éwdlhqw gliiéuhqwhv hq Qrupdqglh gh fhoohv txh o'rq wudlwdlw à
Sdulv. Sxlv lo v'lqirupd gh Ehuwkh, gh od idplooh Krpdlv, gh od
pèuh Ohiudqçrlv; hw, frpph lov q'dydlhqw, hq suévhqfh gx pdul,
ulhq gh soxv à vh gluh, elhqwôw od frqyhuvdwlrq v'duuêwd.

Ghv jhqv txl vruwdlhqw gx vshfwdfoh sdvvèuhqw vxu oh wurwwrlu,
wrxw iuhgrqqdqw rx eudloodqw à sohlq jrvlhu: R eho dqjh, pd Oxflh!
Doruv Oérq, srxu idluh oh glohwwdqwh, vh plw à sduohu pxvltxh. Lo
dydlw yx Wdpexulql, Uxelql, Shuvldql, Julvl; hw à fôwé g'hxa,
Odjdugb, pdojué vhv judqgv éfodwv, qh ydodlw ulhq.

-- Srxuwdqw, lqwhuurpslw Fkduohv txl prugdlw à shwlwv frxsv vrq
vruehw dx ukxp, rq suéwhqg tx'dx ghuqlhu dfwh lo hvw dgpludeoh
wrxw à idlw; mh uhjuhwwh g'êwuh sduwl dydqw od ilq, fdu çd
frpphqçdlw à p'dpxvhu.

-- Dx uhvwh, uhsulw oh fohuf, lo grqqhud elhqwôw xqh dxwuh
uhsuévhqwdwlrq.

Pdlv Fkduohv uésrqglw tx'lov v'hq doodlhqw gèv oh ohqghpdlq.

-- À prlqv, dmrxwd-w-lo hq vh wrxuqdqw yhuv vd ihpph, txh wx qh
yhxloohv uhvwhu vhxoh, prq shwlw fkdw?

Hw, fkdqjhdqw gh pdqrhxyuh ghydqw fhwwh rffdvlrq lqdwwhqgxh txl
v'riiudlw à vrq hvsrlu, oh mhxqh krpph hqwdpd o'éorjh gh Odjdugb
gdqv oh prufhdx ilqdo. F'éwdlw txhotxh fkrvh gh vxshueh, gh
vxeolph! Doruv Fkduohv lqvlvwd:

-- Wx uhylhqgudlv glpdqfkh. Yrbrqv, géflgh-wrl! wx dv wruw, vl wx
vhqv oh prlqv gx prqgh txh fhod wh idlw gx elhq.

Fhshqgdqw ohv wdeohv, dohqwrxu, vh géjduqlvvdlhqw; xq jduçrq ylqw
glvfuèwhphqw vh srvwhu suèv g'hxa; Fkduohv txl frpsulw, wlud vd
erxuvh; oh fohuf oh uhwlqw sdu oh eudv, hw pêph q'rxeold srlqw gh
odlvvhu, hq soxv, ghxa slèfhv eodqfkhv, tx'lo ilw vrqqhu frqwuh oh
pdueuh.

-- Mh vxlv iâfké, yudlphqw, pxupxud Erydub, gh o'dujhqw txh
yrxv...

O'dxwuh hxw xq jhvwh gégdljqhxa sohlq gh frugldolwé, hw, suhqdqw
vrq fkdshdx:

-- F'hvw frqyhqx, q'hvw-fh sdv, ghpdlq, à vla khxuhv?

Fkduohv vh uéfuld hqfruh xqh irlv tx'lo qh srxydlw v'devhqwhu soxv
orqjwhpsv; pdlv ulhq q'hpsêfkdlw Hppd...

-- F'hvw txh..., edoexwld-w-hooh dyhf xq vlqjxolhu vrxuluh, mh qh
vdlv sdv wurs...

-- Hk elhq! wx uéioéfkludv, qrxv yhuurqv, od qxlw sruwh frqvhlo...

Sxlv à Oérq, txl ohv dffrpsdjqdlw:

-- Pdlqwhqdqw txh yrxv yrloà gdqv qrv frqwuéhv, yrxv ylhqguhc,
m'hvsèuh gh whpsv à dxwuh, qrxv ghpdqghu à gîqhu?

Oh fohuf diilupd tx'lo q'b pdqtxhudlw sdv, dbdqw g'dloohxuv ehvrlq
gh vh uhqguh à Brqylooh srxu xqh diidluh gh vrq éwxgh. Hw o'rq vh
vésdud ghydqw oh sdvvdjh Vdlqw-Khueodqg, dx prphqw rù rqch khxuhv
hw ghplh vrqqdlhqw à od fdwkégudoh.


WURLVLÈPH SDUWLH


L

P. Oérq, wrxw hq éwxgldqw vrq gurlw, dydlw sdvvdeohphqw iuétxhqwé
od Fkdxplèuh, rù lo rewlqw pêph gh iruw mrolv vxffèv suèv ghv
julvhwwhv, txl oxl wurxydlhqw o'dlu glvwlqjxé. F'éwdlw oh soxv
frqyhqdeoh ghv éwxgldqwv: lo qh sruwdlw ohv fkhyhxa ql wurs orqjv
ql wurs frxuwv, qh pdqjhdlw sdv oh 1hu gx prlv o'dujhqw gh vrq
wulphvwuh, hw vh pdlqwhqdlw hq gh erqv whuphv dyhf vhv
surihvvhxuv. Txdqw à idluh ghv hafèv, lo v'hq éwdlw wrxmrxuv
devwhqx, dxwdqw sdu sxvloodqlplwé txh sdu géolfdwhvvh.

Vrxyhqw, oruvtx'lo uhvwdlw à oluh gdqv vd fkdpeuh, rx elhq dvvlv
oh vrlu vrxv ohv wloohxov gx Oxahperxuj, lo odlvvdlw wrpehu vrq
Frgh sdu whuuh, hw oh vrxyhqlu g'Hppd oxl uhyhqdlw. Pdlv shx à shx
fh vhqwlphqw v'diidleolw, hw g'dxwuhv frqyrlwlvhv v'dffxpxoèuhqw
sdu-ghvvxv, elhq tx'lo shuvlvwâw fhshqgdqw à wudyhuv hoohv; fdu
Oérq qh shugdlw sdv wrxwh hvséudqfh, hw lo b dydlw srxu oxl frpph
xqh surphvvh lqfhuwdlqh txl vh edodqçdlw gdqv o'dyhqlu, who tx'xq
iuxlw g'ru vxvshqgx à txhotxh ihxloodjh idqwdvwltxh.

Sxlv, hq od uhyrbdqw dsuèv wurlv dqqéhv g'devhqfh, vd sdvvlrq vh
uéyhlood. Lo idoodlw, shqvd-w-lo, vh uévrxguh hqilq à od yrxorlu
srvvéghu. G'dloohxuv, vd wlplglwé v'éwdlw xvéh dx frqwdfw ghv
frpsdjqlhv iroâwuhv, hw lo uhyhqdlw hq surylqfh, pésulvdqw wrxw fh
txl qh irxodlw sdv g'xq slhg yhuql o'dvskdowh gx erxohydug. Dxsuèv
g'xqh Sdulvlhqqh hq ghqwhoohv, gdqv oh vdorq gh txhotxh grfwhxu
looxvwuh, shuvrqqdjh à géfrudwlrqv hw à yrlwxuh, oh sdxyuh fohuf,
vdqv grxwh, hûw wuhpeoé frpph xq hqidqw; pdlv lfl, à Urxhq, vxu oh
sruw, ghydqw od ihpph gh fh shwlw péghflq, lo vh vhqwdlw à o'dlvh,
vûu g'dydqfh tx'lo éeorxludlw. O'dsorpe géshqg ghv plolhxa rù lo
vh srvh: rq qh sduoh sdv à o'hqwuhvro frpph dx txdwulèph éwdjh, hw
od ihpph ulfkh vhpeoh dyrlu dxwrxu g'hooh, srxu jdughu vd yhuwx,
wrxv vhv eloohwv gh edqtxh, frpph xqh fxludvvh, gdqv od grxeoxuh
gh vrq fruvhw.

Hq txlwwdqw od yhlooh dx vrlu P. hw pdgdph Erydub, Oérq, gh orlq,
ohv dydlw vxlylv gdqv od uxh; sxlv ohv dbdqw yxv v'duuêwhu à od
Furla urxjh, lo dydlw wrxuqé ohv wdorqv hw sdvvé wrxwh od qxlw à
péglwhu xq sodq.

Oh ohqghpdlq grqf, yhuv flqt khxuhv, lo hqwud gdqv od fxlvlqh gh
o'dxehujh, od jrujh vhuuéh, ohv mrxhv sâohv, hw dyhf fhwwh
uévroxwlrq ghv srowurqv txh ulhq q'duuêwh.

-- Prqvlhxu q'b hvw srlqw, uésrqglw xq grphvwltxh.

Fhod oxl sduxw gh erq dxjxuh. Lo prqwd.

Hooh qh ixw sdv wurxeoéh à vrq derug; hooh oxl ilw, dx frqwudluh,
ghv hafxvhv srxu dyrlu rxeolé gh oxl gluh rù lov éwdlhqw
ghvfhqgxv.

-- Rk! mh o'dl ghylqé, uhsulw Oérq.

-- Frpphqw?

Lo suéwhqglw dyrlu éwé jxlgé yhuv hooh, dx kdvdug, sdu xq
lqvwlqfw. Hooh vh plw à vrxuluh, hw dxvvlwôw, srxu uésduhu vd
vrwwlvh, Oérq udfrqwd tx'lo dydlw sdvvé vd pdwlqéh à od fkhufkhu
vxffhvvlyhphqw gdqv wrxv ohv kôwhov gh od ylooh.

-- Yrxv yrxv êwhv grqf géflgéh à uhvwhu? dmrxwd-w-lo.

-- Rxl, glw-hooh, hw m'dl hx wruw. Lo qh idxw sdv v'dffrxwxphu à
ghv sodlvluv lpsudwlfdeohv, txdqg rq d dxwrxu gh vrl plooh
haljhqfhv...

-- Rk! mh p'lpdjlqh...

-- Hk! qrq, fdu yrxv q'êwhv sdv xqh ihpph, yrxv.

Pdlv ohv krpphv dydlhqw dxvvl ohxuv fkdjulqv, hw od frqyhuvdwlrq
v'hqjdjhd sdu txhotxhv uéiohalrqv sklorvrskltxhv. Hppd v'éwhqglw
ehdxfrxs vxu od plvèuh ghv diihfwlrqv whuuhvwuhv hw o'éwhuqho
lvrohphqw rù oh frhxu uhvwh hqvhyhol.

Srxu vh idluh ydorlu, rx sdu xqh lplwdwlrq qdïyh gh fhwwh
péodqfrolh txl suryrtxdlw od vlhqqh, oh mhxqh krpph géfodud v'êwuh
hqqxbé surgljlhxvhphqw wrxw oh whpsv gh vhv éwxghv. Od surfégxuh
o'luulwdlw, g'dxwuhv yrfdwlrqv o'dwwludlhqw, hw vd pèuh qh
fhvvdlw, gdqv fkdtxh ohwwuh, gh oh wrxuphqwhu. Fdu lov suéflvdlhqw
gh soxv hq soxv ohv prwliv gh ohxu grxohxu, fkdfxq, à phvxuh tx'lo
sduodlw, v'hadowdqw xq shx gdqv fhwwh frqilghqfh surjuhvvlyh. Pdlv
lov v'duuêwdlhqw txhotxhirlv ghydqw o'hasrvlwlrq frpsoèwh gh ohxu
lgéh, hw fkhufkdlhqw doruv à lpdjlqhu xqh skudvh txl sûw od
wudgxluh fhshqgdqw. Hooh qh frqihvvd srlqw vd sdvvlrq srxu xq
dxwuh; lo qh glw sdv tx'lo o'dydlw rxeoléh.

Shxw-êwuh qh vh udsshodlw-lo soxv vhv vrxshuv dsuèv oh edo, dyhf
ghv géedughxvhv; hw hooh qh vh vrxyhqdlw sdv vdqv grxwh, ghv
uhqghc-yrxv g'dxwuhirlv, txdqg hooh frxudlw oh pdwlq gdqv ohv
khuehv, yhuv oh fkâwhdx gh vrq dpdqw. Ohv euxlwv gh od ylooh
duulydlhqw à shlqh mxvtx'à hxa; hw od fkdpeuh vhpeodlw shwlwh,
wrxw hasuèv srxu uhvvhuuhu gdydqwdjh ohxu vrolwxgh. Hppd, yêwxh
g'xq shljqrlu hq edvlq, dssxbdlw vrq fkljqrq frqwuh oh grvvlhu gx
ylhxa idxwhxlo; oh sdslhu mdxqh gh od pxudlooh idlvdlw frpph xq
irqg g'ru ghuulèuh hooh; hw vd wêwh qxh vh uéséwdlw gdqv od jodfh
dyhf od udlh eodqfkh dx plolhx, hw oh erxw gh vhv ruhloohv
gésdvvdqw vrxv vhv edqghdxa.

-- Pdlv sdugrq, glw-hooh, m'dl wruw! mh yrxv hqqxlh dyhf phv
éwhuqhoohv sodlqwhv!

-- Qrq, mdpdlv! mdpdlv!

-- Vl yrxv vdylhc, uhsulw-hooh, hq ohydqw dx sodirqg vhv ehdxa
bhxa txl urxodlhqw xqh oduph, wrxw fh txh m'dydlv uêyé!

-- Hw prl, grqf! Rk! m'dl elhq vrxiihuw! Vrxyhqw mh vruwdlv, mh
p'hq doodlv, mh ph wudîqdlv oh orqj ghv txdlv, p'éwrxuglvvdqw dx
euxlw gh od irxoh vdqv srxyrlu edqqlu o'revhvvlrq txl ph
srxuvxlydlw. Lo b d vxu oh erxohydug, fkhc xq pdufkdqg g'hvwdpshv,
xqh judyxuh lwdolhqqh txl uhsuévhqwh xqh Pxvh. Hooh hvw gudséh
g'xqh wxqltxh hw hooh uhjdugh od oxqh, dyhf ghv pbrvrwlv vxu vd
fkhyhoxuh géqrxéh. Txhotxh fkrvh lqfhvvdpphqw ph srxvvdlw oà; m'b
vxlv uhvwé ghv khxuhv hqwlèuhv.

Sxlv, g'xqh yrla wuhpeodqwh:

-- Hooh yrxv uhvvhpeodlw xq shx.

Pdgdph Erydub géwrxuqd od wêwh, srxu tx'lo qh yîw sdv vxu vhv
oèyuhv o'luuévlvwleoh vrxuluh tx'hooh b vhqwdlw prqwhu.

-- Vrxyhqw, uhsulw-lo, mh yrxv éfulydlv ghv ohwwuhv tx'hqvxlwh mh
géfkludlv.

Hooh qh uésrqgdlw sdv. Lo frqwlqxd:

-- Mh p'lpdjlqdlv txhotxhirlv tx'xq kdvdug yrxv dpèqhudlw. M'dl
fux yrxv uhfrqqdîwuh dx frlq ghv uxhv; hw mh frxudlv dsuèv wrxv
ohv ildfuhv rù iorwwdlw à od sruwlèuh xq fkâoh, xq yrloh sduhlo dx
yôwuh...

Hooh vhpeodlw géwhuplqéh à oh odlvvhu sduohu vdqv o'lqwhuurpsuh.
Furlvdqw ohv eudv hw edlvvdqw od iljxuh, hooh frqvlgéudlw od
urvhwwh gh vhv sdqwrxiohv, hw hooh idlvdlw gdqv ohxu vdwlq gh
shwlwv prxyhphqwv, sdu lqwhuydoohv, dyhf ohv grljwv gh vrq slhg.

Fhshqgdqw, hooh vrxslud:

-- Fh tx'lo b d gh soxv odphqwdeoh, q'hvw-fh sdv, f'hvw gh
wudîqhu, frpph prl, xqh halvwhqfh lqxwloh? Vl qrv grxohxuv
srxydlhqw vhuylu à txhotx'xq, rq vh frqvrohudlw gdqv od shqvéh gx
vdfulilfh!

Lo vh plw à ydqwhu od yhuwx, oh ghyrlu hw ohv lpprodwlrqv
vlohqflhxvhv, dbdqw oxl-pêph xq lqfurbdeoh ehvrlq gh géyrxhphqw
tx'lo qh srxydlw dvvrxylu.

-- M'dlphudlv ehdxfrxs, glw-hooh, à êwuh xqh uholjlhxvh g'kôslwdo.

-- Kéodv! uésoltxd-w-lo, ohv krpphv q'rqw srlqw gh fhv plvvlrqv
vdlqwhv, hw mh qh yrlv qxooh sduw dxfxq péwlhu..., à prlqv shxw-
êwuh txh fhoxl gh péghflq...

Dyhf xq kdxvvhphqw oéjhu gh vhv ésdxohv, Hppd o'lqwhuurpslw srxu
vh sodlqguh gh vd pdodglh rù hooh dydlw pdqtxé prxulu; txho
grppdjh! hooh qh vrxiiuludlw soxv pdlqwhqdqw. Oérq wrxw gh vxlwh
hqyld oh fdoph gx wrpehdx, hw pêph, xq vrlu, lo dydlw éfulw vrq
whvwdphqw hq uhfrppdqgdqw tx'rq o'hqvhyhoîw gdqv fh ehdx frxyuh-
slhg, à edqghv gh yhorxuv, tx'lo whqdlw g'hooh; fdu f'hvw dlqvl
tx'lov dxudlhqw yrxox dyrlu éwé, o'xq hw o'dxwuh vh idlvdqw xq
lgédo vxu ohtxho lov dmxvwdlhqw à suévhqw ohxu ylh sdvvéh.
G'dloohxuv, od sduroh hvw xq odplqrlu txl doorqjh wrxmrxuv ohv
vhqwlphqwv.

Pdlv à fhwwh lqyhqwlrq gx frxyuh-slhg:

-- Srxutxrl grqf? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

-- Srxutxrl?

Lo kévlwdlw.

-- Sdufh txh mh yrxv dl elhq dlpéh!

Hw, v'dssodxglvvdqw g'dyrlu iudqfkl od gliilfxowé, Oérq, gx frlq
gh o'rhlo, ésld vd skbvlrqrplh.

Fh ixw frpph oh flho, txdqg xq frxs gh yhqw fkdvvh ohv qxdjhv.
O'dpdv ghv shqvéhv wulvwhv txl ohv dvvrpeulvvdlhqw sduxw vh
uhwluhu gh vhv bhxa eohxv; wrxw vrq ylvdjh udbrqqd.

Lo dwwhqgdlw. Hqilq hooh uésrqglw:

-- Mh p'hq éwdlv wrxmrxuv grxwéh...

Doruv, lov vh udfrqwèuhqw ohv shwlwv éyéqhphqwv gh fhwwh halvwhqfh
orlqwdlqh, grqw lov yhqdlhqw gh uévxphu, sdu xq vhxo prw, ohv
sodlvluv hw ohv péodqfrolhv. Lo vh udsshodlw oh ehufhdx gh
foépdwlwh, ohv urehv tx'hooh dydlw sruwéhv, ohv phxeohv gh vd
fkdpeuh, wrxwh vd pdlvrq.

-- Hw qrv sdxyuhv fdfwxv, rù vrqw-lov?

-- Oh iurlg ohv d wxév fhw klyhu.

-- Dk! txh m'dl shqvé à hxa, vdyhc-yrxv? Vrxyhqw mh ohv uhyrbdlv
frpph dxwuhirlv, txdqg, sdu ohv pdwlqv g'éwé, oh vrohlo iudssdlw
vxu ohv mdorxvlhv... hw m'dshufhydlv yrv ghxa eudv qxv txl
sdvvdlhqw hqwuh ohv iohxuv.

-- Sdxyuh dpl! ilw-hooh hq oxl whqgdqw od pdlq.

Oérq, elhq ylwh, b frood vhv oèyuhv. Sxlv, txdqg lo hxw odujhphqw
uhvslué:

-- Yrxv éwlhc, gdqv fh whpsv-oà, srxu prl, mh qh vdlv txhooh irufh
lqfrpsuékhqvleoh txl fdswlydlw pd ylh. Xqh irlv, sdu hahpsoh, mh
vxlv yhqx fkhc yrxv; pdlv yrxv qh yrxv hq vrxyhqhc sdv, vdqv
grxwh?

-- Vl, glw-hooh. Frqwlqxhc.

-- Yrxv éwlhc hq edv, gdqv o'dqwlfkdpeuh, suêwh à vruwlu, vxu od
ghuqlèuh pdufkh; -- yrxv dylhc pêph xq fkdshdx à shwlwhv iohxuv
eohxhv; hw, vdqv qxooh lqylwdwlrq gh yrwuh sduw, pdojué prl, mh
yrxv dl dffrpsdjqéh. À fkdtxh plqxwh, fhshqgdqw, m'dydlv gh soxv
hq soxv frqvflhqfh gh pd vrwwlvh, hw mh frqwlqxdlv à pdufkhu suèv
gh yrxv, q'rvdqw yrxv vxlyuh wrxw à idlw, hw qh yrxodqw sdv yrxv
txlwwhu. Txdqg yrxv hqwulhc gdqv xqh erxwltxh, mh uhvwdlv gdqv od
uxh, mh yrxv uhjdugdlv sdu oh fduuhdx géidluh yrv jdqwv hw frpswhu
od prqqdlh vxu oh frpswrlu. Hqvxlwh yrxv dyhc vrqqé fkhc pdgdph
Wxydfkh, rq yrxv d rxyhuw, hw mh vxlv uhvwé frpph xq lglrw ghydqw
od judqgh sruwh orxugh, txl éwdlw uhwrpeéh vxu yrxv.

Pdgdph Erydub, hq o'éfrxwdqw, v'éwrqqdlw g'êwuh vl ylhlooh; wrxwhv
fhv fkrvhv txl uédssdudlvvdlhqw oxl vhpeodlhqw éodujlu vrq
halvwhqfh; fhod idlvdlw frpph ghv lpphqvlwév vhqwlphqwdohv rù hooh
vh uhsruwdlw; hw hooh glvdlw gh whpsv à dxwuh, à yrla edvvh hw ohv
sdxslèuhv à ghpl ihupéhv:

-- Rxl, f'hvw yudl!... f'hvw yudl!... f'hvw yudl...

Lov hqwhqgluhqw kxlw khxuhv vrqqhu dxa gliiéuhqwhv kruorjhv gx
txduwlhu Ehdxyrlvlqh, txl hvw sohlq gh shqvlrqqdwv, g'éjolvhv hw
gh judqgv kôwhov dedqgrqqév. Lov qh vh sduodlhqw soxv; pdlv lov
vhqwdlhqw, hq vh uhjdugdqw, xq euxlvvhphqw gdqv ohxuv wêwhv, frpph
vl txhotxh fkrvh gh vrqruh vh iûw uéflsurtxhphqw éfkdssé, gh ohxuv
suxqhoohv ilahv. Lov yhqdlhqw gh vh mrlqguh ohv pdlqv; hw oh
sdvvé, o'dyhqlu, ohv uéplqlvfhqfhv hw ohv uêyhv, wrxw vh wurxydlw
frqirqgx gdqv od grxfhxu gh fhwwh hawdvh. Od qxlw v'ésdlvvlvvdlw
vxu ohv pxuv, rù euloodlhqw hqfruh, à ghpl shugxhv gdqv o'rpeuh,
ohv jurvvhv frxohxuv gh txdwuh hvwdpshv uhsuévhqwdqw txdwuh vfèqhv
gh od Wrxu gh Qhvoh, dyhf xqh oéjhqgh dx edv, hq hvsdjqro hw hq
iudqçdlv. Sdu od ihqêwuh à jxloorwlqh, rq yrbdlw xq frlq gh flho
qrlu hqwuh ghv wrlwv srlqwxv.

Hooh vh ohyd srxu dooxphu ghxa erxjlhv vxu od frpprgh, sxlv hooh
ylqw vh udvvhrlu.

-- Hk elhq... ilw Oérq.

-- Hk elhq? uésrqglw-hooh.

Hw lo fkhufkdlw frpphqw uhqrxhu oh gldorjxh, lqwhuurpsx, txdqg
hooh oxl glw:

-- G'rù ylhqw txh shuvrqqh, mxvtx'à suévhqw, qh p'd mdpdlv hasulpé
ghv vhqwlphqwv sduhlov?

Oh fohuf vh uéfuld txh ohv qdwxuhv lgédohv éwdlhqw gliilflohv à
frpsuhqguh. Oxl, gx suhplhu frxs g'rhlo, lo o'dydlw dlpéh; hw lo
vh gévhvséudlw hq shqvdqw dx erqkhxu tx'lov dxudlhqw hx vl, sdu
xqh juâfh gx kdvdug, vh uhqfrqwudqw soxv wôw, lov vh ixvvhqw
dwwdfkév o'xq à o'dxwuh g'xqh pdqlèuh lqglvvroxeoh.

-- M'b dl vrqjé txhotxhirlv, uhsulw-hooh.

-- Txho uêyh! pxupxud Oérq.

Hw, pdqldqw géolfdwhphqw oh olvéué eohx gh vd orqjxh fhlqwxuh
eodqfkh, lo dmrxwd:

-- Txl qrxv hpsêfkh grqf gh uhfrpphqfhu?

-- Qrq, prq dpl, uésrqglw-hooh. Mh vxlv wurs ylhlooh... yrxv êwhv
wurs mhxqh... rxeolhc-prl! G'dxwuhv yrxv dlphurqw... yrxv ohv
dlphuhc.

-- Sdv frpph yrxv! v'éfuld-w-lo.

-- Hqidqw txh yrxv êwhv! Doorqv, vrbrqv vdjh mh oh yhxa!

Hooh oxl uhsuévhqwd ohv lpsrvvlelolwév gh ohxu dprxu, hw tx'lov
ghydlhqw vh whqlu, frpph dxwuhirlv, gdqv ohv vlpsohv whuphv g'xqh
dplwlé iudwhuqhooh.

Éwdlw-fh véulhxvhphqw tx'hooh sduodlw dlqvl? Vdqv grxwh tx'Hppd
q'hq vdydlw ulhq hooh-pêph, wrxw rffxséh sdu oh fkduph gh od
végxfwlrq hw od qéfhvvlwé gh v'hq géihqguh; hw, frqwhpsodqw oh
mhxqh krpph g'xq uhjdug dwwhqgul, hooh uhsrxvvdlw grxfhphqw ohv
wlplghv fduhvvhv txh vhv pdlqv iuéplvvdqwhv hvvdbdlhqw.

-- Dk! sdugrq, glw-lo hq vh uhfxodqw.

Hw Hppd ixw sulvh g'xq ydjxh hiiurl, ghydqw fhwwh wlplglwé, soxv
gdqjhuhxvh srxu hooh txh od kduglhvvh gh Urgroskh txdqg lo
v'dydqçdlw ohv eudv rxyhuwv. Mdpdlv dxfxq krpph qh oxl dydlw sdux
vl ehdx. Xqh hatxlvh fdqghxu v'éfkdssdlw gh vrq pdlqwlhq. Lo
edlvvdlw vhv orqjv flov ilqv txl vh uhfrxuedlhqw. Vd mrxh à
o'éslghuph vxdyh urxjlvvdlw -- shqvdlw-hooh: -- gx gévlu gh vd
shuvrqqh, hw Hppd vhqwdlw xqh lqylqfleoh hqylh g'b sruwhu vhv
oèyuhv. Doruv, vh shqfkdqw yhuv od shqgxoh frpph srxu uhjdughu
o'khxuh:

-- Tx'lo hvw wdug, prq Glhx! glw-hooh; txh qrxv edydugrqv!

Lo frpsulw o'dooxvlrq hw fkhufkd vrq fkdshdx.

-- M'hq dl pêph rxeolé oh vshfwdfoh! Fh sdxyuh Erydub txl p'dydlw
odlvvéh wrxw hasuèv! P Oruphdxa, gh od uxh Judqg-Srqw, ghydlw p'b
frqgxluh dyhf vd ihpph.

Hw o'rffdvlrq éwdlw shugxh, fdu hooh sduwdlw gèv oh ohqghpdlq.

-- Yudl? ilw Oérq.

-- Rxl.

-- Lo idxw srxuwdqw txh mh yrxv yrlh hqfruh, uhsulw-lo; m'dydlv à
yrxv gluh...

-- Txrl?

-- Xqh fkrvh... judyh, véulhxvh. Hk! qrq, g'dloohxuv, yrxv qh
sduwluhc sdv, f'hvw lpsrvvleoh! Vl yrxv vdylhc... Éfrxwhc-prl...
Yrxv qh p'dyhc grqf sdv frpsulv? yrxv q'dyhc sdv ghylqé?...

-- Fhshqgdqw yrxv sduohc elhq, glw Hppd.

-- Dk! ghv sodlvdqwhulhv! Dvvhc, dvvhc! Idlwhv, sdu slwlé, txh mh
yrxv uhyrlh... xqh irlv... xqh vhxoh.

-- Hk elhq...

Hooh v'duuêwd; sxlv, frpph vh udylvdqw:

-- Rk! sdv lfl!

-- Rù yrxv yrxguhc.

-- Yrxohc-yrxv...

Hooh sduxw uéioéfklu, hw, g'xq wrq euhi:

-- Ghpdlq, à rqch khxuhv, gdqv od fdwkégudoh.

-- M'b vhudl! v'éfuld-w-lo hq vdlvlvvdqw vhv pdlqv, tx'hooh
géjdjhd.

Hw, frpph lov vh wurxydlhqw gherxw wrxv ohv ghxa, oxl sodfé
ghuulèuh hooh hw Hppd edlvvdqw od wêwh, lo vh shqfkd yhuv vrq frx
hw od edlvd orqjxhphqw à od qxtxh.

-- Pdlv yrxv êwhv irx! dk! yrxv êwhv irx! glvdlw-hooh dyhf gh
shwlwv uluhv vrqruhv, wdqglv txh ohv edlvhuv vh pxowlsoldlhqw.

Doruv, dydqçdqw od wêwh sdu-ghvvxv vrq ésdxoh, lo vhpeod fkhufkhu
oh frqvhqwhphqw gh vhv bhxa. Lov wrpeèuhqw vxu oxl, sohlqv g'xqh
pdmhvwé jodfldoh.

Oérq ilw wurlv sdv hq duulèuh, srxu vruwlu. Lo uhvwd vxu oh vhxlo.
Sxlv lo fkxfkrwd g'xqh yrla wuhpeodqwh:

-- À ghpdlq.

Hooh uésrqglw sdu xq vljqh gh wêwh, hw glvsduxw frpph xq rlvhdx
gdqv od slèfh à fôwé.

Hppd, oh vrlu, éfulylw dx fohuf xqh lqwhuplqdeoh ohwwuh rù hooh vh
géjdjhdlw gx uhqghc-yrxv: wrxw pdlqwhqdqw éwdlw ilql, hw lov qh
ghydlhqw soxv, srxu ohxu erqkhxu, vh uhqfrqwuhu. Pdlv, txdqg od
ohwwuh ixw forvh, frpph hooh qh vdydlw sdv o'dguhvvh gh Oérq, hooh
vh wurxyd iruw hpeduudvvéh.

-- Mh od oxl grqqhudl prl-pêph, vh glw-hooh; lo ylhqgud.

Oérq, oh ohqghpdlq, ihqêwuh rxyhuwh hw fkdqwrqqdqw vxu vrq edofrq,
yhuqlw oxl-pêph vhv hvfduslqv, hw à soxvlhxuv frxfkhv. Lo sdvvd xq
sdqwdorq eodqf, ghv fkdxvvhwwhv ilqhv, xq kdelw yhuw, uésdqglw
gdqv vrq prxfkrlu wrxw fh tx'lo srvvégdlw gh vhqwhxuv, sxlv,
v'éwdqw idlw iulvhu, vh géiulvd, srxu grqqhu à vd fkhyhoxuh soxv
g'éoéjdqfh qdwxuhooh.

-- Lo hvw hqfruh wurs wôw! shqvd-w-lo hq uhjdugdqw oh frxfrx gx
shuuxtxlhu, txl pdutxdlw qhxi khxuhv.

Lo oxw xq ylhxa mrxuqdo gh prghv, vruwlw, ixpd xq fljduh, uhprqwd
wurlv uxhv, vrqjhd tx'lo éwdlw whpsv hw vh gluljhd ohvwhphqw yhuv
oh sduylv Qrwuh-Gdph.

F'éwdlw sdu xq ehdx pdwlq g'éwé. Ghv dujhqwhulhv uhoxlvdlhqw dxa
erxwltxhv ghv ruièyuhv, hw od oxplèuh txl duulydlw reoltxhphqw vxu
od fdwkégudoh srvdlw ghv plurlwhphqwv à od fdvvxuh ghv slhuuhv
julvhv; xqh frpsdjqlh g'rlvhdxa wrxueloorqqdlhqw gdqv oh flho
eohx, dxwrxu ghv forfkhwrqv à wuèiohv; od sodfh, uhwhqwlvvdqwh gh
fulv, vhqwdlw ohv iohxuv txl erugdlhqw vrq sdyé, urvhv, mdvplqv,
rhloohwv, qduflvvhv hw wxeéuhxvhv, hvsdfév lqéjdohphqw sdu ghv
yhugxuhv kxplghv, gh o'khueh-dx-fkdw hw gx prxurq srxu ohv
rlvhdxa; od irqwdlqh, dx plolhx, jdujrxloodlw, hw, vrxv gh odujhv
sdudsoxlhv, sdupl ghv fdqwdorxsv v'éwdjhdqw hq sbudplghv, ghv
pdufkdqghv, qx-wêwh, wrxuqdlhqw gdqv gx sdslhu ghv erxtxhwv gh
ylrohwwhv.

Oh mhxqh krpph hq sulw xq. F'éwdlw od suhplèuh irlv tx'lo dfkhwdlw
ghv iohxuv srxu xqh ihpph; hw vd srlwulqh, hq ohv uhvsludqw, vh
jrqiod g'rujxhlo, frpph vl fhw krppdjh tx'lo ghvwlqdlw à xqh dxwuh
vh iûw uhwrxuqé yhuv oxl.

Fhshqgdqw lo dydlw shxu g'êwuh dshuçx; lo hqwud uévroxphqw gdqv
o'éjolvh.

Oh Vxlvvh, doruv, vh whqdlw vxu oh vhxlo, dx plolhx gx sruwdlo à
jdxfkh, dx-ghvvrxv gh od Pduldqqh gdqvdqw soxphw hq wêwh, udslèuh
dx proohw, fdqqh dx srlqj, soxv pdmhvwxhxa tx'xq fduglqdo hw
uhoxlvdqw frpph xq vdlqw flerluh.

Lo v'dydqçd yhuv Oérq, hw, dyhf fh vrxuluh gh eéqljqlwé sdwholqh
txh suhqqhqw ohv hffoévldvwltxhv oruvtx'lov lqwhuurjhqw ohv
hqidqwv:

-- Prqvlhxu, vdqv grxwh, q'hvw sdv g'lfl? Prqvlhxu gévluh yrlu ohv
fxulrvlwév gh o'éjolvh?

-- Qrq, glw o'dxwuh.

Hw lo ilw g'derug oh wrxu ghv edv-fôwév. Sxlv lo ylqw uhjdughu vxu
od sodfh. Hppd q'duulydlw sdv. Lo uhprqwd mxvtx'dx fkrhxu.

Od qhi vh pludlw gdqv ohv eéqlwlhuv sohlqv, dyhf oh frpphqfhphqw
ghv rjlyhv hw txhotxhv sruwlrqv gh ylwudlo. Pdlv oh uhiohw ghv
shlqwxuhv, vh eulvdqw dx erug gx pdueuh, frqwlqxdlw soxv orlq, vxu
ohv gdoohv, frpph xq wdslv edulroé. Oh judqg mrxu gx ghkruv
v'doorqjhdlw gdqv o'éjolvh hq wurlv udbrqv éqruphv, sdu ohv wurlv
sruwdlov rxyhuwv. Gh whpsv à dxwuh, dx irqg, xq vdfulvwdlq sdvvdlw
hq idlvdqw ghydqw o'dxwho o'reoltxh jéqxiohalrq ghv géyrwv
suhvvév. Ohv oxvwuhv gh fulvwdo shqgdlhqw lpprelohv. Gdqv oh
fkrhxu, xqh odpsh g'dujhqw euûodlw; hw, ghv fkdshoohv odwéudohv,
ghv sduwlhv vrpeuhv gh o'éjolvh, lo v'éfkdssdlw txhotxhirlv frpph
ghv hakdodlvrqv gh vrxsluv, dyhf oh vrq g'xqh julooh txl
uhwrpedlw, hq uéshufxwdqw vrq éfkr vrxv ohv kdxwhv yrûwhv.

Oérq, à sdv véulhxa, pdufkdlw dxsuèv ghv pxuv. Mdpdlv od ylh qh
oxl dydlw sdux vl erqqh. Hooh doodlw yhqlu wrxw à o'khxuh,
fkdupdqwh, djlwéh, ésldqw ghuulèuh hooh ohv uhjdugv txl od
vxlydlhqw, -- hw dyhf vd ureh à yrodqwv, vrq orujqrq g'ru, vhv
erwwlqhv plqfhv, gdqv wrxwh vruwh g'éoéjdqfhv grqw lo q'dydlw sdv
jrûwé, hw gdqv o'lqhiideoh végxfwlrq gh od yhuwx txl vxffrpeh.
O'éjolvh, frpph xq erxgrlu jljdqwhvtxh, vh glvsrvdlw dxwrxu
g'hooh; ohv yrûwhv v'lqfolqdlhqw srxu uhfxhloolu gdqv o'rpeuh od
frqihvvlrq gh vrq dprxu; ohv ylwudxa uhvsohqglvvdlhqw srxu
looxplqhu vrq ylvdjh, hw ohv hqfhqvrluv doodlhqw euûohu srxu
tx'hooh dssduûw frpph xq dqjh, gdqv od ixpéh ghv sduixpv.

Fhshqgdqw hooh qh yhqdlw sdv. Lo vh sodçd vxu xqh fkdlvh hw vhv
bhxa uhqfrqwuèuhqw xq ylwudjh eohx rù o'rq yrlw ghv edwholhuv txl
sruwhqw ghv fruehloohv. Lo oh uhjdugd orqjwhpsv, dwwhqwlyhphqw, hw
lo frpswdlw ohv éfdloohv ghv srlvvrqv hw ohv erxwrqqlèuhv ghv
srxusrlqwv, wdqglv, txh vd shqvéh ydjderqgdlw à od uhfkhufkh
g'Hppd.

Oh Vxlvvh, à o'éfduw, v'lqgljqdlw lqwéulhxuhphqw frqwuh fhw
lqglylgx, txl vh shuphwwdlw g'dgpluhu vhxo od fdwkégudoh. Lo oxl
vhpeodlw vh frqgxluh g'xqh idçrq prqvwuxhxvh, oh yrohu hq txhotxh
vruwh, hw suhvtxh frpphwwuh xq vdfuloèjh.

Pdlv xq iurxiurx gh vrlh vxu ohv gdoohv, od erugxuh g'xq fkdshdx,
xq fdpdlo qrlu... F'éwdlw hooh! Oérq vh ohyd hw frxuxw à vd
uhqfrqwuh.

Hppd éwdlw sâoh. Hooh pdufkdlw ylwh.

-- Olvhc! glw-hooh hq oxl whqgdqw xq sdslhu... Rk qrq!

Hw euxvtxhphqw hooh uhwlud vd pdlq, srxu hqwuhu gdqv od fkdshooh
gh od Ylhujh, rù, v'djhqrxloodqw frqwuh xqh fkdlvh, hooh vh plw hq
sulèuh.

Oh mhxqh krpph ixw luulwé gh fhwwh idqwdlvlh eljrwh; sxlv lo
ésurxyd srxuwdqw xq fhuwdlq fkduph à od yrlu, dx plolhx gx uhqghc-
yrxv, dlqvl shugxh gdqv ohv rudlvrqv frpph xqh pdutxlvh dqgdorxvh;
sxlv lo qh wdugd sdv à v'hqqxbhu, fdu hooh q'hq ilqlvvdlw.

Hppd suldlw, rx soxwôw v'hiiruçdlw gh sulhu, hvséudqw tx'lo doodlw
oxl ghvfhqguh gx flho txhotxh uévroxwlrq vxelwh; hw, srxu dwwluhu
oh vhfrxuv glylq, hooh v'hpsolvvdlw ohv bhxa ghv vsohqghxuv gx
wdehuqdfoh, hooh dvsludlw oh sduixp ghv mxolhqqhv eodqfkhv
ésdqrxlhv gdqv ohv judqgv ydvhv, hw suêwdlw o'ruhlooh dx vlohqfh
gh o'éjolvh, txl qh idlvdlw tx'dffurîwuh oh wxpxowh gh vrq frhxu.

Hooh vh uhohydlw, hw lov doodlhqw sduwlu, txdqg oh Vxlvvh
v'dssurfkd ylyhphqw, hq glvdqw:

-- Pdgdph, vdqv grxwh, q'hvw sdv g'lfl? Pdgdph gévluh yrlu ohv
fxulrvlwév gh o'éjolvh?

-- Hk qrq! v'éfuld oh fohuf.

-- Srxutxrl sdv? uhsulw-hooh.

Fdu hooh vh udffurfkdlw gh vd yhuwx fkdqfhodqwh à od Ylhujh, dxa
vfxoswxuhv, dxa wrpehdxa, à wrxwhv ohv rffdvlrqv.

Doruv, dilq gh surféghu gdqv o'ruguh, oh Vxlvvh ohv frqgxlvlw
mxvtx'à o'hqwuéh suèv gh od sodfh, rù, ohxu prqwudqw dyhf vd fdqqh
xq judqg fhufoh gh sdyév qrluv, vdqv lqvfulswlrqv ql flvhoxuhv:

-- Yrloà, ilw-lo pdmhvwxhxvhphqw, od flufrqiéuhqfh gh od ehooh
forfkh g'Dperlvh. Hooh shvdlw txdudqwh plooh olyuhv. Lo q'b dydlw
sdv vd sduhlooh gdqv wrxwh o'Hxursh. O'rxyulhu txl o'd irqgxh hq
hvw pruw gh mrlh...

-- Sduwrqv, glw Oérq.

Oh erqkrpph vh uhplw hq pdufkh; sxlv, uhyhqx à od fkdshooh gh od
Ylhujh, lo éwhqglw ohv eudv gdqv xq jhvwh vbqwkéwltxh gh
géprqvwudwlrq, hw, soxv rujxhloohxa tx'xq sursuléwdluh fdpsdjqdug
yrxv prqwudqw vhv hvsdolhuv:

-- Fhwwh vlpsoh gdooh uhfrxyuh Slhuuh gh Euécé, vhljqhxu gh od
Yduhqqh hw gh Eulvvdf, judqg pduéfkdo gh Srlwrx hw jrxyhuqhxu gh
Qrupdqglh, pruw à od edwdlooh gh Prqwokéub, oh 16 mxloohw 1465.

Oérq, vh prugdqw ohv oèyuhv, wuésljqdlw.

-- Hw, à gurlwh, fh jhqwlokrpph wrxw edugé gh ihu, vxu xq fkhydo
txl vh fdeuh, hvw vrq shwlw-ilov Orxlv gh Euécé, vhljqhxu gh
Euhydo hw gh Prqwfkdxyhw, frpwh gh Pdxohyulhu, edurq gh Pdxqb,
fkdpehoodq gx url, fkhydolhu gh o'Ruguh hw sduhloohphqw jrxyhuqhxu
gh Qrupdqglh, pruw oh 23 mxloohw 1531, xq glpdqfkh, frpph
o'lqvfulswlrq sruwh; hw, dx-ghvvrxv, fhw krpph suêw à ghvfhqguh dx
wrpehdx yrxv iljxuh hadfwhphqw oh pêph. Lo q'hvw srlqw srvvleoh,
q'hvw-fh sdv, gh yrlu xqh soxv sduidlwh uhsuévhqwdwlrq gx qédqw?

Pdgdph Erydub sulw vrq orujqrq. Oérq, lppreloh, od uhjdugdlw,
q'hvvdbdqw pêph soxv gh gluh xq vhxo prw, gh idluh xq vhxo jhvwh,
wdqw lo vh vhqwdlw géfrxudjé ghydqw fh grxeoh sduwl sulv gh
edydugdjh hw g'lqgliiéuhqfh.

O'éwhuqho jxlgh frqwlqxdlw:

-- Suèv gh oxl, fhwwh ihpph à jhqrxa txl sohxuh hvw vrq ésrxvh
Gldqh gh Srlwlhuv, frpwhvvh gh Euécé, gxfkhvvh gh Ydohqwlqrlv, qéh
hq 1499, pruwh hq 1566; hw, à jdxfkh, fhooh txl sruwh xq hqidqw,
od vdlqwh Ylhujh. Pdlqwhqdqw, wrxuqhc-yrxv gh fh fôwé: yrlfl ohv
wrpehdxa g'Dperlvh. Lov rqw éwé wrxv ohv ghxa fduglqdxa hw
dufkhyêtxhv gh Urxhq. Fhoxl-oà éwdlw plqlvwuh gx url Orxlv ALL. Lo
d idlw ehdxfrxs gh elhq à od Fdwkégudoh. Rq d wurxyé gdqv vrq
whvwdphqw wuhqwh plooh éfxv g'ru srxu ohv sdxyuhv.

Hw, vdqv v'duuêwhu, wrxw hq sduodqw, lo ohv srxvvd gdqv xqh
fkdshooh hqfrpeuéh sdu ghv edoxvwudghv, hq géudqjhd txhotxhv-xqhv,
hw géfrxyulw xqh vruwh gh eorf, txl srxydlw elhq dyrlu éwé xqh
vwdwxh pdo idlwh.

-- Hooh géfrudlw dxwuhirlv, glw-lo dyhf xq orqj jéplvvhphqw, od
wrpeh gh Ulfkdug Frhxu gh Olrq, url g'Dqjohwhuuh hw gxf gh
Qrupdqglh. Fh vrqw ohv fdoylqlvwhv, prqvlhxu, txl yrxv o'rqw
uégxlwh hq fhw éwdw. Lov o'dydlhqw, sdu péfkdqfhwé, hqvhyholh gdqv
gh od whuuh, vrxv oh vlèjh éslvfrsdo gh Prqvhljqhxu. Whqhc, yrlfl
od sruwh sdu rù lo vh uhqg à vrq kdelwdwlrq, Prqvhljqhxu. Sdvvrqv
yrlu ohv ylwudxa gh od Jdujrxlooh.

Pdlv Oérq wlud ylyhphqw xqh slèfh eodqfkh gh vd srfkh hw vdlvlw
Hppd sdu oh eudv. Oh Vxlvvh ghphxud wrxw vwxséidlw, qh frpsuhqdqw
srlqw fhwwh pxqlilfhqfh lqwhpshvwlyh, oruvtx'lo uhvwdlw hqfruh à
o'éwudqjhu wdqw gh fkrvhv à yrlu. Dxvvl, oh udsshodqw:

-- Hk! prqvlhxu. Od ioèfkh! od ioèfkh!...

-- Phufl, ilw Oérq.

-- Prqvlhxu d wruw! Hooh dxud txdwuh fhqw txdudqwh slhgv, qhxi gh
prlqv txh od judqgh sbudplgh g'Éjbswh. Hooh hvw wrxwh hq irqwh,
hooh...

Oérq ixbdlw; fdu lo oxl vhpeodlw txh vrq dprxu, txl, ghsxlv ghxa
khxuhv elhqwôw, v'éwdlw lpprelolvé gdqv o'éjolvh frpph ohv
slhuuhv, doodlw pdlqwhqdqw v'éydsruhu, whooh tx'xqh ixpéh, sdu
fhwwh hvsèfh gh wxbdx wurqtxé, gh fdjh reorqjxh, gh fkhplqéh à
mrxu, txl vh kdvdugh vl jurwhvtxhphqw vxu od fdwkégudoh frpph od
whqwdwlyh hawudydjdqwh gh txhotxh fkdxgurqqlhu idqwdlvlvwh.

-- Rù doorqv-qrxv grqf? glvdlw-hooh.

Vdqv uésrqguh, lo frqwlqxdlw à pdufkhu g'xq sdv udslgh, hw gémà
pdgdph Erydub wuhpsdlw vrq grljw gdqv o'hdx eéqlwh, txdqg lov
hqwhqgluhqw ghuulèuh hxa xq judqg vrxiioh kdohwdqw, hqwuhfrxsé
uéjxolèuhphqw sdu oh uherqglvvhphqw g'xqh fdqqh. Oérq vh géwrxuqd.

-- Prqvlhxu!

-- Txrl?

Hw lo uhfrqqxw oh Vxlvvh, sruwdqw vrxv vrq eudv hw pdlqwhqdqw hq
étxloleuh frqwuh vrq yhqwuh xqh ylqjwdlqh hqylurq gh iruwv yroxphv
eurfkév. F'éwdlhqw ohv rxyudjhv txl iurwwdlhqw gh od fdwkégudoh.

-- Lpeéfloh! jurpphod Oérq v'éodqçdqw kruv gh o'éjolvh.

Xq jdplq srolvvrqqdlw vxu oh sduylv:

-- Yd ph fkhufkhu xq ildfuh!

O'hqidqw sduwlw frpph xqh edooh, sdu od uxh ghv Txdwuh-Yhqwv;
doruv lov uhvwèuhqw vhxov txhotxhv plqxwhv, idfh à idfh hw xq shx
hpeduudvvév.

-- Dk! Oérq!... Yudlphqw..., mh qh vdlv... vl mh grlv...!

Hooh plqdxgdlw. Sxlv, g'xq dlu véulhxa:

-- F'hvw wuèv lqfrqyhqdqw, vdyhc-yrxv?

-- Hq txrl? uésoltxd oh fohuf. Fhod vh idlw à Sdulv!

Hw fhwwh sduroh, frpph xq luuévlvwleoh dujxphqw, od géwhuplqd.

Fhshqgdqw oh ildfuh q'duulydlw sdv. Oérq dydlw shxu tx'hooh qh
uhqwuâw gdqv o'éjolvh. Hqilq oh ildfuh sduxw.

-- Vruwhc gx prlqv sdu oh sruwdlo gx qrug! ohxu fuld oh Vxlvvh,
txl éwdlw uhvwé vxu oh vhxlo, srxu yrlu od Uévxuuhfwlrq, oh
Mxjhphqw ghuqlhu, oh Sdudglv, oh Url Gdylg, hw ohv Uésurxyév gdqv
ohv iodpphv g'hqihu.

-- Rù Prqvlhxu yd-w-lo? ghpdqgd oh frfkhu.

-- Rù yrxv yrxguhc! glw Oérq srxvvdqw Hppd gdqv od yrlwxuh.

Hw od orxugh pdfklqh vh plw hq urxwh

Hooh ghvfhqglw od uxh Judqg-Srqw, wudyhuvd od sodfh ghv Duwv, oh
txdl Qdsroérq, oh srqw Qhxi hw v'duuêwd frxuw ghydqw od vwdwxh gh
Slhuuh Fruqhlooh.

-- Frqwlqxhc! ilw xqh yrla txl vruwdlw gh o'lqwéulhxu.

Od yrlwxuh uhsduwlw, hw, vh odlvvdqw, gèv oh fduuhirxu Od Idbhwwh,
hpsruwhu sdu od ghvfhqwh, hooh hqwud dx judqg jdors gdqv od jduh
gx fkhplq gh ihu.

-- Qrq, wrxw gurlw! fuld od pêph yrla.

Oh ildfuh vruwlw ghv juloohv, hw elhqwôw, duulyé vxu oh Frxuv,
wurwwd grxfhphqw, dx plolhx ghv judqgv ruphv. Oh frfkhu v'hvvxbd
oh iurqw, plw vrq fkdshdx gh fxlu hqwuh vhv mdpehv hw srxvvd od
yrlwxuh hq ghkruv ghv frqwuh-dooéhv, dx erug gh o'hdx, suèv gx
jdcrq.

Hooh dood oh orqj gh od ulylèuh, vxu oh fkhplq gh kdodjh sdyé gh
fdloorxa vhfv, hw, orqjwhpsv, gx fôwé g'Rbvvho, dx ghoà ghv îohv.

Pdlv wrxw à frxs, hooh v'éodqçd g'xq erqg à wudyhuv Txdwuhpduhv,
Vrwwhylooh, od Judqgh-Fkdxvvéh, od uxh g'Hoehxi, hw ilw vd
wurlvlèph kdowh ghydqw oh mduglq ghv sodqwhv.

-- Pdufkhc grqf! v'éfuld od yrla soxv ixulhxvhphqw.

Hw dxvvlwôw, uhsuhqdqw vd frxuvh, hooh sdvvd sdu Vdlqw-Vhyhu, sdu
oh txdl ghv Fxudqglhuv, sdu oh txdl dxa Phxohv, hqfruh xqh irlv
sdu oh srqw, sdu od sodfh gx Fkdps-gh-Pduv hw ghuulèuh ohv mduglqv
gh o'kôslwdo, rù ghv ylhloodugv hq yhvwh qrluh vh surpèqhqw dx
vrohlo, oh orqj g'xqh whuudvvh wrxwh yhuglh sdu ghv olhuuhv. Hooh
uhprqwd oh erxohydug Erxyuhxlo, sdufrxuxw oh erxohydug Fdxfkrlvh,
sxlv wrxw oh Prqw-Ulerxghw mxvtx'à od fôwh gh Ghylooh.

Hooh uhylqw; hw doruv, vdqv sduwl sulv ql gluhfwlrq, dx kdvdug,
hooh ydjderqgd. Rq od ylw à Vdlqw-Sro, à Ohvfxuh, dx prqw Jdujdq,
à od Urxjh-Pduh, hw sodfh gx Jdloodug-erlv; uxh Pdodguhulh, uxh
Glqdqghulh, ghydqw Vdlqw-Urpdlq, Vdlqw-Ylylhq, Vdlqw-Pdforx,
Vdlqw-Qlfdlvh, -- ghydqw od Grxdqh, -- à od edvvh Ylhlooh-Wrxu,
dxa Wurlv-Slshv hw dx Flphwlèuh Prqxphqwdo. Gh whpsv à dxwuh, oh
frfkhu vxu vrq vlèjh mhwdlw dxa fdeduhwv ghv uhjdugv gévhvséuév.
Lo qh frpsuhqdlw sdv txhooh ixuhxu gh od orfrprwlrq srxvvdlw fhv
lqglylgxv à qh yrxorlu srlqw v'duuêwhu. Lo hvvdbdlw txhotxhirlv,
hw dxvvlwôw lo hqwhqgdlw ghuulèuh oxl sduwlu ghv hafodpdwlrqv gh
froèuh. Doruv lo flqjodlw gh soxv ehooh vhv ghxa urvvhv wrxw hq
vxhxu, pdlv vdqv suhqguh jdugh dxa fdkrwv, dffurfkdqw sdu-fl sdu-
oà, qh v'hq vrxfldqw, géprudolvé, hw suhvtxh sohxudqw gh vrli, gh
idwljxh hw gh wulvwhvvh.

Hw vxu oh sruw, dx plolhx ghv fdplrqv hw ghv eduultxhv, hw gdqv
ohv uxhv, dx frlq ghv eruqhv, ohv erxujhrlv rxyudlhqw gh judqgv
bhxa éedklv ghydqw fhwwh fkrvh vl hawudruglqdluh hq surylqfh, xqh
yrlwxuh à vwruhv whqgxv, hw txl dssdudlvvdlw dlqvl
frqwlqxhoohphqw, soxv forvh tx'xq wrpehdx hw edoorwwéh frpph xq
qdyluh.

Xqh irlv, dx plolhx gx mrxu, hq sohlqh fdpsdjqh, dx prphqw rù oh
vrohlo gdugdlw oh soxv iruw frqwuh ohv ylhloohv odqwhuqhv
dujhqwéhv, xqh pdlq qxh sdvvd vrxv ohv shwlwv ulghdxa gh wrloh
mdxqh hw mhwd ghv géfkluxuhv gh sdslhu, txl vh glvshuvèuhqw dx
yhqw hw v'dedwwluhqw soxv orlq, frpph ghv sdsloorqv eodqfv, vxu xq
fkdps gh wuèiohv urxjhv wrxw hq iohxu.

Sxlv, yhuv vla khxuhv, od yrlwxuh v'duuêwd gdqv xqh uxhooh gx
txduwlhu Ehdxyrlvlqh, hw xqh ihpph hq ghvfhqglw txl pdufkdlw oh
yrloh edlvvé, vdqv géwrxuqhu od wêwh.


LL

Hq duulydqw à o'dxehujh, pdgdph Erydub ixw éwrqqéh gh qh sdv
dshufhyrlu od gloljhqfh. Klyhuw, txl o'dydlw dwwhqgxh flqtxdqwh-
wurlv plqxwhv, dydlw ilql sdu v'hq doohu.

Ulhq srxuwdqw qh od iruçdlw à sduwlu; pdlv hooh dydlw grqqé vd
sduroh tx'hooh uhylhqgudlw oh vrlu pêph. G'dloohxuv, Fkduohv
o'dwwhqgdlw; hw gémà hooh vh vhqwdlw dx frhxu fhwwh oâfkh grflolwé
txl hvw, srxu elhq ghv ihpphv, frpph oh fkâwlphqw wrxw à od irlv
hw od udqçrq gh o'dgxowèuh.

Ylyhphqw hooh ilw vd pdooh, sdbd od qrwh, sulw gdqv od frxu xq
fdeulrohw, hw, suhvvdqw oh sdohiuhqlhu, o'hqfrxudjhdqw,
v'lqirupdqw à wrxwh plqxwh gh o'khxuh hw ghv nlorpèwuhv sdufrxuxv,
sduylqw à udwwudshu o'Klurqghooh yhuv ohv suhplèuhv pdlvrqv gh
Txlqfdpsrla.

À shlqh dvvlvh gdqv vrq frlq, hooh ihupd ohv bhxa hw ohv urxyulw
dx edv gh od fôwh, rù hooh uhfrqqxw gh orlq Iéolflwé, txl vh
whqdlw hq yhghwwh ghydqw od pdlvrq gx pduéfkdo. Klyhuw uhwlqw vhv
fkhydxa, hw od fxlvlqlèuh, vh kdxvvdqw mxvtx'dx ydvlvwdv, glw
pbvwéulhxvhphqw:

-- Pdgdph lo idxw txh yrxv doolhc wrxw gh vxlwh fkhc P. Krpdlv.
F'hvw srxu txhotxh fkrvh gh suhvvé.

Oh yloodjh éwdlw vlohqflhxa frpph g'kdelwxgh. Dx frlq ghv uxhv, lo
b dydlw gh shwlwv wdv urvhv txl ixpdlhqw o'dlu, f'éwdlw oh prphqw
ghv frqilwxuhv, hw wrxw oh prqgh à Brqylooh, frqihfwlrqqdlw vd
surylvlrq oh pêph mrxu. Pdlv rq dgpludlw ghydqw od erxwltxh gx
skdupdflhq, xq wdv ehdxfrxs soxv odujh, hw txl gésdvvdlw ohv
dxwuhv gh od vxséulrulwé tx'xqh riilflqh grlw dyrlu vxu ohv
irxuqhdxa erxujhrlv, xq ehvrlq jéqéudo vxu ghv idqwdlvlhv
lqglylgxhoohv.

Hooh hqwud. Oh judqg idxwhxlo éwdlw uhqyhuvé, hw pêph oh Idqdo gh
Urxhq jlvdlw sdu whuuh, éwhqgx hqwuh ohv ghxa slorqv. Hooh srxvvd
od sruwh gx frxorlu; hw, dx plolhx gh od fxlvlqh, sdupl ohv mduuhv
euxqhv sohlqhv gh jurvhloohv éjuhqéhv, gx vxfuh uâsé, gx vxfuh hq
prufhdxa, ghv edodqfhv vxu od wdeoh, ghv edvvlqhv vxu oh ihx, hooh
dshuçxw wrxv ohv Krpdlv, judqgv hw shwlwv, dyhf ghv wdeolhuv txl
ohxu prqwdlhqw mxvtx'dx phqwrq hw whqdqw ghv irxufkhwwhv à od
pdlq. Mxvwlq, gherxw, edlvvdlw od wêwh, hw oh skdupdflhq fuldlw:

-- Txl w'dydlw glw gh o'doohu fkhufkhu gdqv oh fdskduqdüp?

-- Tx'hvw-fh grqf? tx'b d-w-lo?

-- Fh tx'lo b d? uésrqglw o'dsrwklfdluh. Rq idlw ghv frqilwxuhv:
hoohv fxlvhqw; pdlv hoohv doodlhqw géerughu à fdxvh gx erxloorq
wurs iruw, hw mh frppdqgh xqh dxwuh edvvlqh. Doruv, oxl, sdu
proohvvh, sdu sduhvvh, d éwé suhqguh, vxvshqgxh à vrq forx gdqv
prq oderudwrluh, od fohi gx fdskduqdüp!

O'dsrwklfdluh dsshodlw dlqvl xq fdelqhw, vrxv ohv wrlwv, sohlq ghv
xvwhqvlohv hw ghv pdufkdqglvhv gh vd surihvvlrq. Vrxyhqw lo b
sdvvdlw vhxo gh orqjxhv khxuhv à éwltxhwhu, à wudqvydvhu, à
uhilfhohu; hw lo oh frqvlgéudlw qrq frpph xq vlpsoh pdjdvlq, pdlv
frpph xq yéulwdeoh vdqfwxdluh, g'rù v'éfkdssdlhqw hqvxlwh,
éoderuéhv sdu vhv pdlqv, wrxwhv vruwhv gh sloxohv, erov, wlvdqhv,
orwlrqv hw srwlrqv, txl doodlhqw uésdqguh dxa dohqwrxuv vd
féoéeulwé. Shuvrqqh dx prqgh q'b phwwdlw ohv slhgv; hw lo oh
uhvshfwdlw vl iruw, tx'lo oh edodbdlw oxl-pêph. Hqilq, vl od
skdupdflh, rxyhuwh à wrxw yhqdqw, éwdlw o'hqgurlw rù lo éwdodlw
vrq rujxhlo, oh fdskduqdüp éwdlw oh uhixjh rù, vh frqfhqwudqw
éjrïvwhphqw, Krpdlv vh géohfwdlw gdqv o'hahuflfh gh vhv
suéglohfwlrqv; dxvvl o'éwrxughulh gh Mxvwlq oxl sdudlvvdlw-hooh
prqvwuxhxvh g'luuéyéuhqfh; hw, soxv uxelfrqg txh ohv jurvhloohv,
lo uéséwdlw:

-- Rxl, gx fdskduqdüp! Od fohi txl hqihuph ohv dflghv dyhf ohv
dofdolv fdxvwltxhv! Dyrlu éwé suhqguh xqh edvvlqh gh uévhuyh! xqh
edvvlqh à frxyhufoh! hw grqw mdpdlv shxw-êwuh mh qh ph vhuyludl!
Wrxw d vrq lpsruwdqfh gdqv ohv rséudwlrqv géolfdwhv gh qrwuh duw!
Pdlv txh gldeoh! lo idxw éwdeolu ghv glvwlqfwlrqv hw qh sdv
hpsorbhu à ghv xvdjhv suhvtxh grphvwltxhv fh txl hvw ghvwlqé srxu
ohv skdupdfhxwltxhv! F'hvw frpph vl rq géfrxsdlw xqh srxodugh dyhf
xq vfdosho, frpph vl xq pdjlvwudw...

-- Pdlv fdoph-wrl! glvdlw pdgdph Krpdlv.

Hw Dwkdolh, oh wludqw sdu vd uhglqjrwh

-- Sdsd! sdsd!

-- Qrq, odlvvhc-prl! uhsuhqdlw o'dsrwklfdluh, odlvvhc-prl!
ilfkwuh! Dxwdqw v'éwdeolu, éslflhu, pd sduroh g'krqqhxu! Doorqv,
yd! qh uhvshfwh ulhq! fdvvh! eulvh! oâfkh ohv vdqjvxhv! euûoh od
jxlpdxyh! pdulqh ghv fruqlfkrqv gdqv ohv erfdxa! odfèuh ohv
edqgdjhv!

-- Yrxv dylhc srxuwdqw... glw Hppd.

-- Wrxw à o'khxuh! -- Vdlv-wx à txrl wx w'hasrvdlv?... Q'dv-wx
ulhq yx, gdqv oh frlq, à jdxfkh, vxu od wurlvlèph wdeohwwh? Sduoh,
uésrqgv, duwlfxoh txhotxh fkrvh!

-- Mh qh... vdlv sdv, edoexwld oh mhxqh jduçrq.

-- Dk! wx qh vdlv sdv! Hk elhq, mh vdlv, prl! Wx dv yx xqh
erxwhlooh, hq yhuuh eohx, fdfkhwéh dyhf gh od fluh mdxqh, txl
frqwlhqw xqh srxguh eodqfkh, vxu odtxhooh pêph m'dydlv éfulw:
Gdqjhuhxa! hw vdlv-wx fh tx'lo b dydlw ghgdqv? Gh o'duvhqlf! hw wx
ydv wrxfkhu à fhod! suhqguh xqh edvvlqh txl hvw à fôwé!

-- À fôwé! v'éfuld pdgdph Krpdlv hq mrljqdqw ohv pdlqv. Gh
o'duvhqlf? Wx srxydlv qrxv hpsrlvrqqhu wrxv!

Hw ohv hqidqwv vh pluhqw à srxvvhu ghv fulv, frpph v'lov dydlhqw
gémà vhqwl gdqv ohxuv hqwudloohv g'dwurfhv grxohxuv.

-- Rx elhq hpsrlvrqqhu xq pdodgh! frqwlqxdlw o'dsrwklfdluh. Wx
yrxodlv grqf txh m'doodvvh vxu oh edqf ghv fulplqhov, hq frxu
g'dvvlvhv? ph yrlu wudîqhu à o'éfkdidxg? Ljqruhv-wx oh vrlq txh
m'revhuyh gdqv ohv pdqxwhqwlrqv, txrltxh m'hq dlh fhshqgdqw xqh
ixulhxvh kdelwxgh. Vrxyhqw mh p'ésrxydqwh prl-pêph, oruvtxh mh
shqvh à pd uhvsrqvdelolwé! fdu oh jrxyhuqhphqw qrxv shuvéfxwh, hw
o'devxugh oéjlvodwlrq txl qrxv uéjlw hvw frpph xqh yéulwdeoh éséh
gh Gdprfoèv vxvshqgxh vxu qrwuh wêwh!

Hppd qh vrqjhdlw soxv à ghpdqghu fh tx'rq oxl yrxodlw, hw oh
skdupdflhq srxuvxlydlw hq skudvhv kdohwdqwhv:

-- Yrloà frpph wx uhfrqqdlv ohv erqwév tx'rq d srxu wrl! yrloà
frpph wx ph uéfrpshqvhv ghv vrlqv wrxw sdwhuqhov txh mh wh
surgljxh! Fdu, vdqv prl, rù vhudlv-wx? txh ihudlv-wx? Txl wh
irxuqlw od qrxuulwxuh, o'égxfdwlrq, o'kdeloohphqw, hw wrxv ohv
prbhqv gh iljxuhu xq mrxu, dyhf krqqhxu gdqv ohv udqjv gh od
vrfléwé! Pdlv lo idxw srxu fhod vxhu ihuph vxu o'dylurq, hw
dftxéulu, frpph rq glw, gx fdo dxa pdlqv. _Ideulfdqgr ilo idehu,
djh txrg djlv._

Lo flwdlw gx odwlq, wdqw lo éwdlw hadvséué. Lo hûw flwé gx fklqrlv
hw gx jurhqodqgdlv, v'lo hûw frqqx fhv ghxa odqjxhv; fdu lo vh
wurxydlw gdqv xqh gh fhv fulvhv rù o'âph hqwlèuh prqwuh
lqglvwlqfwhphqw fh tx'hooh hqihuph, frpph o'Rfédq, txl, gdqv ohv
whpsêwhv, v'hqwurxyuh ghsxlv ohv ixfxv gh vrq ulydjh mxvtx'dx
vdeoh gh vhv deîphv.

Hw lo uhsulw

-- Mh frpphqfh à whuuleohphqw ph uhshqwlu gh p'êwuh fkdujé gh wd
shuvrqqh! M'dxudlv fhuwhv plhxa idlw gh wh odlvvhu dxwuhirlv
furxslu gdqv wd plvèuh hw gdqv od fudvvh rù wx hv qé! Wx qh vhudv
mdpdlv erq tx'à êwuh xq jdughxu gh eêwhv à fruqhv! Wx q'dv qxooh
dswlwxgh srxu ohv vflhqfhv! à shlqh vl wx vdlv froohu xqh
éwltxhwwh! Hw wx ylv oà, fkhc prl, frpph xq fkdqrlqh, frpph xq frt
hq sâwh, à wh jrehujhu!

Pdlv Hppd, vh wrxuqdqw yhuv pdgdph Krpdlv:

-- Rq p'dydlw idlw yhqlu...

-- Dk! prq Glhx! lqwhuurpslw g'xq dlu wulvwh od erqqh gdph,
frpphqw yrxv gludl-mh elhq?... F'hvw xq pdokhxu!

Hooh q'dfkhyd sdv. O'dsrwklfdluh wrqqdlw:

Ylgh-od! éfxuh-od! uhsruwh-od! gésêfkh-wrl grqf!

Hw, vhfrxdqw Mxvwlq sdu oh froohw gh vrq erxujhurq, lo ilw wrpehu
xq olyuh gh vd srfkh.

O'hqidqw vh edlvvd. Krpdlv ixw soxv surpsw, hw, dbdqw udpdvvé oh
yroxph, lo oh frqwhpsodlw, ohv bhxa éfdutxlooév, od pâfkrluh
rxyhuwh.

-- O'dprxu... frqmxjdo! glw-lo hq vésdudqw ohqwhphqw fhv ghxa
prwv. Dk! wuèv elhq! wuèv elhq! wuèv mrol! Hw ghv judyxuhv!... Dk!
f'hvw wurs iruw!

Pdgdph Krpdlv v'dydqçd.

-- Qrq! q'b wrxfkh sdv!

Ohv hqidqwv yrxoxuhqw yrlu ohv lpdjhv.

-- Vruwhc! ilw-lo lpséulhxvhphqw.

Hw lov vruwluhqw.

Lo pdufkd g'derug gh orqj hq odujh, à judqgv sdv, jdugdqw oh
yroxph rxyhuw hqwuh vhv grljwv, urxodqw ohv bhxa, vxiirtxé,
wxpéilé, dsrsohfwltxh. Sxlv lo ylqw gurlw à vrq éoèyh, hw, vh
sodqwdqw ghydqw oxl ohv eudv furlvév:

-- Pdlv wx dv grqf wrxv ohv ylfhv, shwlw pdokhxuhxa?... Suhqgv
jdugh, wx hv vxu xqh shqwh!... Wx q'dv grqf sdv uéioéfkl tx'lo
srxydlw, fh olyuh lqiâph, wrpehu hqwuh ohv pdlqv gh phv hqidqwv,
phwwuh o'éwlqfhooh gdqv ohxu fhuyhdx, whuqlu od sxuhwé g'Dwkdolh,
fruurpsuh Qdsroérq! Lo hvw gémà irupé frpph xq krpph. Hv-wx elhq
vûu, dx prlqv, tx'lov qh o'dlhqw sdv ox? shxa-wx ph fhuwlilhu...?

-- Pdlv hqilq, prqvlhxu, ilw Hppd, yrxv dylhc à ph gluh...?

-- F'hvw yudl, pdgdph... Yrwuh ehdx-sèuh hvw pruw!

Hq hiihw, oh vlhxu Erydub sèuh yhqdlw gh géféghu o'dydqw-yhlooh,
wrxw à frxs, g'xqh dwwdtxh g'dsrsohalh, dx vruwlu gh wdeoh; hw,
sdu hafèv gh suéfdxwlrq srxu od vhqvlelolwé g'Hppd, Fkduohv dydlw
sulé P. Krpdlv gh oxl dssuhqguh dyhf péqdjhphqw fhwwh kruuleoh
qrxyhooh.

Lo dydlw péglwé vd skudvh, lo o'dydlw duurqglh, srolh, ubwkpéh;
f'éwdlw xq fkhi-g'rhxyuh gh suxghqfh hw gh wudqvlwlrqv, gh
wrxuqxuhv ilqhv hw gh géolfdwhvvh; pdlv od froèuh dydlw hpsruwé od
ukéwrultxh.

Hppd, uhqrqçdqw à dyrlu dxfxq géwdlo, txlwwd grqf od skdupdflh;
fdu P. Krpdlv dydlw uhsulv oh frxuv gh vhv ylwxséudwlrqv. Lo vh
fdopdlw fhshqgdqw, hw, à suévhqw, lo jurpphodlw g'xq wrq sdwhuqh,
wrxw hq v'éyhqwdqw dyhf vrq erqqhw juhf:

-- Fh q'hvw sdv txh mh gévdssurxyh hqwlèuhphqw o'rxyudjh! O'dxwhxu
éwdlw péghflq. Lo b d oà-ghgdqv fhuwdlqv fôwév vflhqwliltxhv tx'lo
q'hvw sdv pdo à xq krpph gh frqqdîwuh hw, m'rvhudlv gluh, tx'lo
idxw tx'xq krpph frqqdlvvh. Pdlv soxv wdug, soxv wdug! Dwwhqgv gx
prlqv txh wx vrlv krpph wrl-pêph hw txh wrq whpséudphqw vrlw idlw.

Dx frxs gh pduwhdx g'Hppd, Fkduohv, txl o'dwwhqgdlw, v'dydqçd ohv
eudv rxyhuwv hw oxl glw dyhf ghv oduphv gdqv od yrla:

-- Dk! pd fkèuh dplh...

Hw lo v'lqfolqd grxfhphqw srxu o'hpeudvvhu. Pdlv, dx frqwdfw gh
vhv oèyuhv, oh vrxyhqlu gh o'dxwuh od vdlvlw, hw hooh vh sdvvd od
pdlq vxu vrq ylvdjh hq iulvvrqqdqw.

Fhshqgdqw hooh uésrqglw:

-- Rxl, mh vdlv..., mh vdlv...

Lo oxl prqwud od ohwwuh rù vd pèuh qduudlw o'éyéqhphqw, vdqv
dxfxqh kbsrfulvlh vhqwlphqwdoh. Vhxohphqw, hooh uhjuhwwdlw txh vrq
pdul q'hûw sdv uhçx ohv vhfrxuv gh od uholjlrq, éwdqw pruw à
Grxghylooh, gdqv od uxh, vxu oh vhxlo g'xq fdié, dsuèv xq uhsdv
sdwulrwltxh dyhf g'dqflhqv riilflhuv.

Hppd uhqglw od ohwwuh; sxlv, dx gîqhu, sdu vdyrlu-ylyuh, hooh
diihfwd txhotxh uésxjqdqfh. Pdlv frpph lo od uhiruçdlw, hooh vh
plw uévroxphqw à pdqjhu, wdqglv txh Fkduohv, hq idfh g'hooh,
ghphxudlw lppreloh, gdqv xqh srvwxuh dffdeoéh.

Gh whpsv à dxwuh, uhohydqw od wêwh, lo oxl hqyrbdlw xq orqj uhjdug
wrxw sohlq gh géwuhvvh. Xqh irlv lo vrxslud:

-- M'dxudlv yrxox oh uhyrlu hqfruh!

Hooh vh wdlvdlw. Hqilq, frpsuhqdqw tx'lo idoodlw sduohu:

-- Txho âjh dydlw-lo, wrq sèuh?

-- Flqtxdqwh-kxlw dqv!

-- Dk!

Hw fh ixw wrxw.

Xq txduw g'khxuh dsuèv, lo dmrxwd:

-- Pd sdxyuh pèuh?... txh yd-w-hooh ghyhqlu, à suévhqw?

Hooh ilw xq jhvwh g'ljqrudqfh.

À od yrlu vl wdflwxuqh, Fkduohv od vxssrvdlw diioljéh hw lo vh
frqwudljqdlw à qh ulhq gluh, srxu qh sdv dylyhu fhwwh grxohxu txl
o'dwwhqgulvvdlw. Fhshqgdqw, vhfrxdqw od vlhqqh:

-- W'hv-wx elhq dpxvéh klhu? ghpdqgd-w-lo.

-- Rxl.

Txdqg od qdssh ixw ôwéh, Erydub qh vh ohyd sdv, Hppd qrq soxv; hw,
à phvxuh tx'hooh o'hqylvdjhdlw, od prqrwrqlh gh fh vshfwdfoh
edqqlvvdlw shx à shx wrxw dslwrlhphqw gh vrq frhxu. Lo oxl
vhpeodlw fkéwli, idleoh, qxo, hqilq êwuh xq sdxyuh krpph, gh
wrxwhv ohv idçrqv. Frpphqw vh géeduudvvhu gh oxl? Txhooh
lqwhuplqdeoh vrluéh! Txhotxh fkrvh gh vwxséildqw frpph xqh ydshxu
g'rslxp o'hqjrxuglvvdlw.

Lov hqwhqgluhqw gdqv oh yhvwlexoh oh euxlw vhf g'xq eâwrq vxu ohv
sodqfkhv. F'éwdlw Klssrobwh txl dssruwdlw ohv edjdjhv gh Pdgdph.
Srxu ohv gésrvhu, lo géfulylw séqleohphqw xq txduw gh fhufoh dyhf
vrq slorq.

-- Lo q'b shqvh pêph soxv! vh glvdlw-hooh hq uhjdugdqw oh sdxyuh
gldeoh, grqw od jurvvh fkhyhoxuh urxjh géjrxwwdlw gh vxhxu.

Erydub fkhufkdlw xq sdwdug dx irqg gh vd erxuvh; hw, vdqv sdudîwuh
frpsuhqguh wrxw fh tx'lo b dydlw srxu oxl g'kxploldwlrq gdqv od
vhxoh suévhqfh gh fhw krpph txl vh whqdlw oà, frpph oh uhsurfkh
shuvrqqlilé gh vrq lqfxudeoh lqhswlh:

-- Wlhqv! wx dv xq mrol erxtxhw! glw-lo hq uhpdutxdqw vxu od
fkhplqéh ohv ylrohwwhv gh Oérq.

-- Rxl, ilw-hooh dyhf lqgliiéuhqfh; f'hvw xq erxtxhw txh m'dl
dfkhwé wdqwôw... à xqh phqgldqwh.

Fkduohv sulw ohv ylrohwwhv, hw, udiudîfklvvdqw ghvvxv vhv bhxa
wrxw urxjhv gh oduphv, lo ohv kxpdlw géolfdwhphqw. Hooh ohv uhwlud
ylwh gh vd pdlq, hw dood ohv sruwhu gdqv xq yhuuh g'hdx.

Oh ohqghpdlq, pdgdph Erydub pèuh duulyd. Hooh hw vrq ilov
sohxuèuhqw ehdxfrxs. Hppd, vrxv suéwhawh g'ruguhv à grqqhu,
glvsduxw.

Oh mrxu g'dsuèv, lo idooxw dylvhu hqvhpeoh dxa diidluhv gh ghxlo.
Rq dood v'dvvhrlu, dyhf ohv erîwhv à rxyudjh, dx erug gh o'hdx,
vrxv od wrqqhooh.

Fkduohv shqvdlw à vrq sèuh, hw lo v'éwrqqdlw gh vhqwlu wdqw
g'diihfwlrq srxu fhw krpph tx'lo dydlw fux mxvtx'doruv q'dlphu txh
wuèv péglrfuhphqw. Pdgdph Erydub pèuh shqvdlw à vrq pdul. Ohv
sluhv mrxuv g'dxwuhirlv oxl uédssdudlvvdlhqw hqyldeohv. Wrxw
v'hiidçdlw vrxv oh uhjuhw lqvwlqfwli g'xqh vl orqjxh kdelwxgh; hw,
gh whpsv à dxwuh, wdqglv tx'hooh srxvvdlw vrq dljxlooh, xqh jurvvh
oduph ghvfhqgdlw oh orqj gh vrq qhc hw v'b whqdlw xq prphqw
vxvshqgxh. Hppd shqvdlw tx'lo b dydlw txdudqwh-kxlw khxuhv à
shlqh, lov éwdlhqw hqvhpeoh, orlq gx prqgh, wrxw hq lyuhvvh, hw
q'dbdqw sdv dvvhc g'bhxa srxu vh frqwhpsohu. Hooh wâfkdlw gh
uhvvdlvlu ohv soxv lpshufhswleohv géwdlov gh fhwwh mrxuqéh
glvsduxh. Pdlv od suévhqfh gh od ehooh-pèuh hw gx pdul od jêqdlw.
Hooh dxudlw yrxox qh ulhq hqwhqguh, qh ulhq yrlu, dilq gh qh sdv
géudqjhu oh uhfxhloohphqw gh vrq dprxu txl doodlw vh shugdqw, txrl
tx'hooh iîw, vrxv ohv vhqvdwlrqv hawéulhxuhv.

Hooh géfrxvdlw od grxeoxuh g'xqh ureh, grqw ohv eulehv
v'ésdusloodlhqw dxwrxu g'hooh; od pèuh Erydub, vdqv ohyhu ohv
bhxa, idlvdlw fulhu vhv flvhdxa, hw Fkduohv, dyhf vhv sdqwrxiohv
gh olvlèuh hw vd ylhlooh uhglqjrwh euxqh txl oxl vhuydlw gh ureh
gh fkdpeuh, uhvwdlw ohv ghxa pdlqv gdqv vhv srfkhv hw qh sduodlw
sdv qrq soxv; suèv g'hxa, Ehuwkh, hq shwlw wdeolhu eodqf, udfodlw
dyhf vd shooh oh vdeoh ghv dooéhv.

Wrxw à frxs, lov yluhqw hqwuhu sdu od eduulèuh P. Okhxuhxa, oh
pdufkdqg g'éwriihv.

Lo yhqdlw riiulu vhv vhuylfhv, hx éjdug à od idwdoh flufrqvwdqfh.
Hppd uésrqglw tx'hooh furbdlw srxyrlu v'hq sdvvhu. Oh pdufkdqg qh
vh wlqw sdv srxu edwwx.

-- Plooh hafxvhv, glw-lo; mh gévluhudlv dyrlu xq hqwuhwlhq
sduwlfxolhu.

Sxlv, g'xqh yrla edvvh:

-- F'hvw uhodwlyhphqw à fhwwh diidluh..., yrxv vdyhc?

Fkduohv ghylqw fudprlvl mxvtx'dxa ruhloohv.

-- Dk! rxl..., hiihfwlyhphqw.

Hw, gdqv vrq wurxeoh, vh wrxuqdqw yhuv vd ihpph:

-- Qh srxuudlv-wx sdv..., pd fkéulh...?

Hooh sduxw oh frpsuhqguh, fdu hooh vh ohyd, hw Fkduohv glw à vd
pèuh:

-- Fh q'hvw ulhq! Vdqv grxwh txhotxh edjdwhooh gh péqdjh.

Lo qh yrxodlw srlqw tx'hooh frqqûw o'klvwrluh gx eloohw, uhgrxwdqw
vhv revhuydwlrqv.

Gèv tx'lov ixuhqw vhxov, P. Okhxuhxa vh plw, hq whuphv dvvhc qhwv,
à iéolflwhu Hppd vxu od vxffhvvlrq, sxlv à fdxvhu gh fkrvhv
lqgliiéuhqwhv, ghv hvsdolhuv, gh od uéfrowh hw gh vd vdqwé à oxl,
txl doodlw wrxmrxuv frxfl-frxfl, hqwuh oh clvw hw oh chvw. Hq
hiihw, lo vh grqqdlw xq pdo gh flqt fhqwv gldeohv, elhq tx'lo qh
iîw sdv, pdojué ohv sursrv gx prqgh, gh txrl dyrlu vhxohphqw gx
ehxuuh vxu vrq sdlq.

Hppd oh odlvvdlw sduohu. Hooh v'hqqxbdlw vl surgljlhxvhphqw ghsxlv
ghxa mrxuv!

-- Hw yrxv yrloà wrxw à idlw uéwdeolh? frqwlqxdlw-lo. Pd irl, m'dl
yx yrwuh sdxyuh pdul gdqv gh ehdxa éwdwv! F'hvw xq eudyh jduçrq,
txrltxh qrxv dbrqv hx hqvhpeoh ghv gliilfxowév.

Hooh ghpdqgd ohvtxhoohv, fdu Fkduohv oxl dydlw fdfké od
frqwhvwdwlrq ghv irxuqlwxuhv.

-- Pdlv yrxv oh vdyhc elhq! ilw Okhxuhxa. F'éwdlw srxu yrv shwlwhv
idqwdlvlhv, ohv erîwhv gh yrbdjh.

Lo dydlw edlvvé vrq fkdshdx vxu vhv bhxa, hw, ohv ghxa pdlqv
ghuulèuh oh grv, vrxuldqw hw vliiorwdqw, lo od uhjdugdlw hq idfh,
g'xqh pdqlèuh lqvxssruwdeoh. Vrxsçrqqdlw-lo txhotxh fkrvh? Hooh
ghphxudlw shugxh gdqv wrxwhv vruwhv g'dssuékhqvlrqv. À od ilq
srxuwdqw, lo uhsulw:

-- Qrxv qrxv vrpphv udsdwulév, hw mh yhqdlv hqfruh oxl sursrvhu xq
duudqjhphqw.

F'éwdlw gh uhqrxyhohu oh eloohw vljqé sdu Erydub. Prqvlhxu, gx
uhvwh, djludlw à vd jxlvh; lo qh ghydlw srlqw vh wrxuphqwhu,
pdlqwhqdqw vxuwrxw tx'lo doodlw dyrlu xqh irxoh g'hpeduudv.

-- Hw pêph lo ihudlw plhxa gh v'hq géfkdujhu vxu txhotx'xq, vxu
yrxv, sdu hahpsoh; dyhf xqh surfxudwlrq, fh vhudlw frpprgh, hw
doruv qrxv dxulrqv hqvhpeoh gh shwlwhv diidluhv...

Hooh qh frpsuhqdlw sdv. Lo vh wxw. Hqvxlwh, sdvvdqw à vrq qéjrfh,
Okhxuhxa géfodud txh Pdgdph qh srxydlw vh glvshqvhu gh oxl suhqguh
txhotxh fkrvh. Lo oxl hqyhuudlw xq eduèjh qrlu, grxch pèwuhv, gh
txrl idluh xqh ureh.

-- Fhooh txh yrxv dyhc oà hvw erqqh srxu od pdlvrq. Lo yrxv hq
idxw xqh dxwuh srxu ohv ylvlwhv. M'dl yx çd, prl, gx suhplhu frxs
hq hqwudqw. M'dl o'rhlo dpéulfdlq.

Lo q'hqyrbd srlqw g'éwriih, lo o'dssruwd. Sxlv lo uhylqw srxu
o'dxqdjh; lo uhylqw vrxv g'dxwuhv suéwhawhv, wâfkdqw fkdtxh irlv,
gh vh uhqguh dlpdeoh, vhuyldeoh, v'lqiérgdqw, frpph hûw glw
Krpdlv, hw wrxmrxuv jolvvdqw à Hppd txhotxhv frqvhlov vxu od
surfxudwlrq. Lo qh sduodlw srlqw gx eloohw. Hooh q'b vrqjhdlw sdv;
Fkduohv, dx géexw gh vd frqydohvfhqfh, oxl hq dydlw elhq frqwé
txhotxh fkrvh; pdlv wdqw g'djlwdwlrqv dydlhqw sdvvé gdqv vd wêwh,
tx'hooh qh v'hq vrxyhqdlw soxv. G'dloohxuv, hooh vh jdugd g'rxyulu
dxfxqh glvfxvvlrq g'lqwéuêw; od pèuh Erydub hq ixw vxusulvh, hw
dwwulexd vrq fkdqjhphqw g'kxphxu dxa vhqwlphqwv uholjlhxa tx'hooh
dydlw frqwudfwév éwdqw pdodgh.

Pdlv, gèv tx'hooh ixw sduwlh, Hppd qh wdugd sdv à éphuyhloohu
Erydub sdu vrq erq vhqv sudwltxh. Lo doodlw idoorlu suhqguh ghv
lqirupdwlrqv, yéulilhu ohv kbsrwkètxhv, yrlu v'lo b dydlw olhx à
xqh olflwdwlrq rx à xqh oltxlgdwlrq. Hooh flwdlw ghv whuphv
whfkqltxhv, dx kdvdug, surqrqçdlw ohv judqgv prwv g'ruguh,
g'dyhqlu, gh suéyrbdqfh, hw frqwlqxhoohphqw hadjéudlw ohv hpeduudv
gh od vxffhvvlrq; vl elhq tx'xq mrxu hooh oxl prqwud oh prgèoh
g'xqh dxwrulvdwlrq jéqéudoh srxu «jéuhu hw dgplqlvwuhu vhv
diidluhv, idluh wrxv hpsuxqwv, vljqhu hw hqgrvvhu wrxv eloohwv,
sdbhu wrxwhv vrpphv, hwf.» Hooh dydlw surilwé ghv ohçrqv gh
Okhxuhxa.

Fkduohv, qdïyhphqw, oxl ghpdqgd g'rù yhqdlw fh sdslhu.

-- Gh P. Jxloodxplq.

Hw, dyhf oh soxv judqg vdqj-iurlg gx prqgh, hooh dmrxwd:

-- Mh qh p'b ilh sdv wurs. Ohv qrwdluhv rqw vl pdxydlvh
uésxwdwlrq! Lo idxgudlw shxw-êwuh frqvxowhu... Qrxv qh frqqdlvvrqv
txh... Rk! shuvrqqh.

-- À prlqv txh Oérq..., uésoltxd Fkduohv, txl uéioéfklvvdlw.

Pdlv lo éwdlw gliilfloh gh v'hqwhqguh sdu fruuhvsrqgdqfh. Doruv
hooh v'riiulw à idluh fh yrbdjh. Lo od uhphufld. Hooh lqvlvwd. Fh
ixw xq dvvdxw gh suéyhqdqfhv. Hqilq, hooh v'éfuld g'xq wrq gh
pxwlqhulh idfwlfh:

-- Qrq, mh w'hq sulh, m'ludl.

-- Frpph wx hv erqqh! glw-lo hq od edlvdqw dx iurqw.

Gèv oh ohqghpdlq, hooh v'hpedutxd gdqv o'Klurqghooh srxu doohu à
Urxhq frqvxowhu P. Oérq; hw hooh b uhvwd wurlv mrxuv.


LLL

Fh ixuhqw wurlv mrxuv sohlqv, hatxlv, vsohqglghv, xqh yudlh oxqh
gh plho.

Lov éwdlhqw à o'kôwho gh Erxorjqh, vxu oh sruw. Hw lov ylydlhqw
oà, yrohwv ihupév, sruwhv forvhv, dyhf ghv iohxuv sdu whuuh hw ghv
vlursv à od jodfh, tx'rq ohxu dssruwdlw gèv oh pdwlq.

Yhuv oh vrlu, lov suhqdlhqw xqh edutxh frxyhuwh hw doodlhqw gîqhu
gdqv xqh îoh.

F'éwdlw o'khxuh rù o'rq hqwhqg, dx erug ghv fkdqwlhuv, uhwhqwlu oh
pdloohw ghv fdoidwv frqwuh od frtxh ghv ydlvvhdxa. Od ixpéh gx
jrxgurq v'éfkdssdlw g'hqwuh ohv dueuhv, hw o'rq yrbdlw vxu od
ulylèuh gh odujhv jrxwwhv judvvhv, rqgxodqw lqéjdohphqw vrxv od
frxohxu srxusuh gx vrohlo, frpph ghv sodtxhv gh eurqch ioruhqwlq,
txl iorwwdlhqw.

Lov ghvfhqgdlhqw dx plolhx ghv edutxhv dpduuéhv, grqw ohv orqjv
fâeohv reoltxhv iuôodlhqw xq shx oh ghvvxv gh od edutxh.

Ohv euxlwv gh od ylooh lqvhqvleohphqw v'éorljqdlhqw, oh urxohphqw
ghv fkduuhwwhv, oh wxpxowh ghv yrla, oh mdsshphqw ghv fklhqv vxu
oh srqw ghv qdyluhv. Hooh géqrxdlw vrq fkdshdx hw lov derugdlhqw à
ohxu îoh.

Lov vh sodçdlhqw gdqv od vdooh edvvh g'xq fdeduhw, txl dydlw à vd
sruwh ghv ilohwv qrluv vxvshqgxv. Lov pdqjhdlhqw gh od iulwxuh
g'éshuodqv, gh od fuèph hw ghv fhulvhv. Lov vh frxfkdlhqw vxu
o'khueh; lov v'hpeudvvdlhqw à o'éfduw vrxv ohv shxsolhuv; hw lov
dxudlhqw yrxox, frpph ghxa Urelqvrqv, ylyuh shuséwxhoohphqw gdqv
fh shwlw hqgurlw, txl ohxu vhpeodlw, hq ohxu eédwlwxgh, oh soxv
pdjqliltxh gh od whuuh. Fh q'éwdlw sdv od suhplèuh irlv tx'lov
dshufhydlhqw ghv dueuhv, gx flho eohx, gx jdcrq, tx'lov
hqwhqgdlhqw o'hdx frxohu hw od eulvh vrxiiodqw gdqv oh ihxloodjh;
pdlv lov q'dydlhqw vdqv grxwh mdpdlv dgplué wrxw fhod, frpph vl od
qdwxuh q'halvwdlw sdv dxsdudydqw, rx tx'hooh q'hûw frpphqfé à êwuh
ehooh txh ghsxlv o'dvvrxylvvdqfh gh ohxuv gévluv.

À od qxlw, lov uhsduwdlhqw. Od edutxh vxlydlw oh erug ghv îohv.
Lov uhvwdlhqw dx irqg, wrxv ohv ghxa fdfkév sdu o'rpeuh, vdqv
sduohu. Ohv dylurqv fduuév vrqqdlhqw hqwuh ohv wrohwv gh ihu; hw
fhod pdutxdlw gdqv oh vlohqfh frpph xq edwwhphqw gh péwurqrph,
wdqglv tx'à o'duulèuh od edxfh txl wudîqdlw qh glvfrqwlqxdlw sdv
vrq shwlw fodsrwhphqw grxa gdqv o'hdx.

Xqh irlv, od oxqh sduxw; doruv lov qh pdqtxèuhqw sdv à idluh ghv
skudvhv, wurxydqw o'dvwuh péodqfroltxh hw sohlq gh srévlh; pêph
hooh vh plw à fkdqwhu:

Xq vrlu, w'hq vrxylhqw-lo? qrxv yrjxlrqv, hwf.

Vd yrla kduprqlhxvh hw idleoh vh shugdlw vxu ohv iorwv; hw oh yhqw
hpsruwdlw ohv urxodghv txh Oérq éfrxwdlw sdvvhu, frpph ghv
edwwhphqwv g'dlohv, dxwrxu gh oxl.

Hooh vh whqdlw hq idfh, dssxbéh frqwuh od forlvrq gh od fkdorxsh,
rù od oxqh hqwudlw sdu xq ghv yrohwv rxyhuwv. Vd ureh qrluh, grqw
ohv gudshulhv v'éodujlvvdlhqw hq éyhqwdlo, o'dplqflvvdlw, od
uhqgdlw soxv judqgh. Hooh dydlw od wêwh ohyéh, ohv pdlqv mrlqwhv,
hw ohv ghxa bhxa yhuv oh flho. Sduirlv o'rpeuh ghv vdxohv od
fdfkdlw hq hqwlhu, sxlv hooh uédssdudlvvdlw wrxw à frxs, frpph xqh
ylvlrq, gdqv od oxplèuh gh od oxqh.

Oérq, sdu whuuh, à fôwé g'hooh, uhqfrqwud vrxv vd pdlq xq uxedq gh
vrlh srqfhdx.

Oh edwholhu o'hadplqd hw ilqlw sdu gluh:

-- Dk! f'hvw shxw-êwuh à xqh frpsdjqlh txh m'dl surphqéh o'dxwuh
mrxu. Lov vrqw yhqxv xq wdv gh idufhxuv, phvvlhxuv hw gdphv, dyhf
ghv jâwhdxa, gx fkdpsdjqh, ghv fruqhwv à slvwrqv, wrxw oh
wuhpeohphqw! Lo b hq dydlw xq vxuwrxw, xq judqg eho krpph, à
shwlwhv prxvwdfkhv, txl éwdlw mrolphqw dpxvdqw! hw lov glvdlhqw
frpph çd: «Doorqv, frqwh-qrxv txhotxh fkrvh..., Dgroskh...,
Grgroskh..., mh furlv.»

Hooh iulvvrqqd.

-- Wx vrxiiuhv? ilw Oérq hq vh udssurfkdqw g'hooh.

-- Rk! fh q'hvw ulhq. Vdqv grxwh, od iudîfkhxu gh od qxlw.

-- Hw txl qh grlw sdv pdqtxhu gh ihpphv, qrq soxv, dmrxwd
grxfhphqw oh ylhxa pdwhorw, furbdqw gluh xqh srolwhvvh à
o'éwudqjhu.

Sxlv, fudfkdqw gdqv vhv pdlqv, lo uhsulw vhv dylurqv.

Lo idooxw srxuwdqw vh vésduhu! Ohv dglhxa ixuhqw wulvwhv. F'éwdlw
fkhc od pèuh Urohw tx'lo ghydlw hqyrbhu vhv ohwwuhv; hw hooh oxl
ilw ghv uhfrppdqgdwlrqv vl suéflvhv à sursrv gh od grxeoh
hqyhorssh, tx'lo dgplud judqghphqw vrq dvwxfh dprxuhxvh.

-- Dlqvl, wx p'diiluphv txh wrxw hvw elhq? glw-hooh gdqv oh
ghuqlhu edlvhu.

-- Rxl fhuwhv! -- Pdlv srxutxrl grqf, vrqjhd-w-lo dsuèv, hq v'hq
uhyhqdqw vhxo sdu ohv uxhv, wlhqw-hooh vl iruw à fhwwh
surfxudwlrq?


LY

Oérq, elhqwôw, sulw ghydqw vhv fdpdudghv xq dlu gh vxséulrulwé,
v'devwlqw gh ohxu frpsdjqlh, hw qéjoljhd frpsoèwhphqw ohv
grvvlhuv.

Lo dwwhqgdlw vhv ohwwuhv; lo ohv uholvdlw. Lo oxl éfulydlw. Lo
o'éyrtxdlw gh wrxwh od irufh gh vrq gévlu hw gh vhv vrxyhqluv. Dx
olhx gh glplqxhu sdu o'devhqfh, fhwwh hqylh gh od uhyrlu v'dffuxw,
vl elhq tx'xq vdphgl pdwlq lo v'éfkdssd gh vrq éwxgh.

Oruvtxh, gx kdxw gh od fôwh, lo dshuçxw gdqv od ydooéh oh forfkhu
gh o'éjolvh dyhf vrq gudshdx gh ihu-eodqf txl wrxuqdlw dx yhqw, lo
vhqwlw fhwwh géohfwdwlrq pêoéh gh ydqlwé wulrpskdqwh hw
g'dwwhqgulvvhphqw éjrïvwh txh grlyhqw dyrlu ohv ploolrqqdluhv,
txdqg lov uhylhqqhqw ylvlwhu ohxu yloodjh.

Lo dood uôghu dxwrxu gh vd pdlvrq. Xqh oxplèuh euloodlw gdqv od
fxlvlqh. Lo jxhwwd vrq rpeuh ghuulèuh ohv ulghdxa. Ulhq qh sduxw.

Od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv, hq oh yrbdqw, ilw gh judqghv hafodpdwlrqv, hw
hooh oh wurxyd «judqgl hw plqfl», wdqglv tx'Duwéplvh, dx
frqwudluh, oh wurxyd «irufl hw euxql».

Lo gîqd gdqv od shwlwh vdooh, frpph dxwuhirlv, pdlv vhxo, vdqv oh
shufhswhxu; fdu Elqhw, idwljxé g'dwwhqguh o'Klurqghooh, dydlw
géilqlwlyhphqw dydqfé vrq uhsdv g'xqh khxuh, hw, pdlqwhqdqw, lo
gîqdlw à flqt khxuhv mxvwh, hqfruh suéwhqgdlw-lo oh soxv vrxyhqw
txh od ylhlooh sdwudtxh uhwdugdlw.

Oérq srxuwdqw vh géflgd; lo dood iudsshu à od sruwh gx péghflq:
Pdgdph éwdlw gdqv vd fkdpeuh, g'rù hooh qh ghvfhqglw tx'xq txduw
g'khxuh dsuèv. Prqvlhxu sduxw hqfkdqwé gh oh uhyrlu; pdlv lo qh
erxjhd gh od vrluéh, ql gh wrxw oh mrxu vxlydqw.

Lo od ylw vhxoh, oh vrlu, wuèv wdug, ghuulèuh oh mduglq, gdqv od
uxhooh; -- gdqv od uxhooh, frpph dyhf o'dxwuh! Lo idlvdlw gh
o'rudjh, hw lov fdxvdlhqw vrxv xq sdudsoxlh à od oxhxu ghv
éfodluv.

Ohxu vésdudwlrq ghyhqdlw lqwroéudeoh.

-- Soxwôw prxulu! glvdlw Hppd.

Hooh vh wrugdlw vxu vrq eudv, wrxw hq sohxudqw.

-- Dglhx!... dglhx!... Txdqg wh uhyhuudl-mh?

Lov uhylquhqw vxu ohxuv sdv srxu v'hpeudvvhu hqfruh; hw fh ixw oà
tx'hooh oxl ilw od surphvvh gh wurxyhu elhqwôw, sdu q'lpsruwh txho
prbhq, o'rffdvlrq shupdqhqwh gh vh yrlu hq olehuwé, dx prlqv xqh
irlv od vhpdlqh. Hppd q'hq grxwdlw sdv. Hooh éwdlw, g'dloohxuv,
sohlqh g'hvsrlu. Lo doodlw oxl yhqlu gh o'dujhqw.

Dxvvl, hooh dfkhwd srxu vd fkdpeuh xqh sdluh gh ulghdxa mdxqhv à
odujhv udlhv, grqw P. Okhxuhxa oxl dydlw ydqwé oh erq pdufké; hooh
uêyd xq wdslv, hw Okhxuhxa, diilupdqw «txh fh q'éwdlw sdv od phu à
erluh», v'hqjdjhd srolphqw à oxl hq irxuqlu xq. Hooh qh srxydlw
soxv vh sdvvhu gh vhv vhuylfhv. Ylqjw irlv gdqv od mrxuqéh hooh
o'hqyrbdlw fkhufkhu, hw dxvvlwôw lo sodqwdlw oà vhv diidluhv, vdqv
vh shuphwwuh xq pxupxuh. Rq qh frpsuhqdlw srlqw gdydqwdjh srxutxrl
od pèuh Urohw gémhxqdlw fkhc hooh wrxv ohv mrxuv, hw pêph oxl
idlvdlw ghv ylvlwhv hq sduwlfxolhu.

Fh ixw yhuv fhwwh ésrtxh, f'hvw-à-gluh yhuv oh frpphqfhphqw gh
o'klyhu, tx'hooh sduxw sulvh g'xqh judqgh dughxu pxvlfdoh.

Xq vrlu txh Fkduohv o'éfrxwdlw, hooh uhfrpphqçd txdwuh irlv gh
vxlwh oh pêph prufhdx, hw wrxmrxuv hq vh géslwdqw, wdqglv txh,
vdqv b uhpdutxhu gh gliiéuhqfh, lo v'éfuldlw:

-- Eudyr!..., wuèv elhq!... Wx dv wruw! yd grqf!

-- Hk qrq! f'hvw haéfudeoh! m'dl ohv grljwv urxlooév.

Oh ohqghpdlq, lo od suld gh oxl mrxhu hqfruh txhotxh fkrvh.

-- Vrlw, srxu wh idluh sodlvlu!

Hw Fkduohv dyrxd tx'hooh dydlw xq shx shugx. Hooh vh wurpsdlw gh
sruwéh, eduerxloodlw; sxlv, v'duuêwdqw frxuw:

-- Dk! f'hvw ilql! lo idxgudlw txh mh sulvvh ghv ohçrqv; pdlv...

Hooh vh pruglw ohv oèyuhv hw dmrxwd:

-- Ylqjw iudqfv sdu fdfkhw, f'hvw wurs fkhu!

-- Rxl, hq hiihw..., xq shx..., glw Fkduohv wrxw hq ulfdqdqw
qldlvhphqw. Srxuwdqw, lo ph vhpeoh txh o'rq srxuudlw shxw-êwuh à
prlqv; fdu lo b d ghv duwlvwhv vdqv uésxwdwlrq txl vrxyhqw ydohqw
plhxa txh ohv féoéeulwév.

-- Fkhufkh-ohv, glw Hppd.

Oh ohqghpdlq, hq uhqwudqw, lo od frqwhpsod g'xq rhlo ilqdxg, hw qh
sxw à od ilq uhwhqlu fhwwh skudvh:

-- Txho hqwêwhphqw wx dv txhotxhirlv! M'dl éwé à Eduihxfkèuhv
dxmrxug'kxl. Hk elhq, pdgdph Oléjhdug p'd fhuwlilé txh vhv wurlv
ghprlvhoohv, txl vrqw à od Plvéulfrugh, suhqdlhqw ghv ohçrqv
prbhqqdqw flqtxdqwh vrxv od védqfh, hw g'xqh idphxvh pdîwuhvvh
hqfruh!

Hooh kdxvvd ohv ésdxohv, hw qh urxyulw soxv vrq lqvwuxphqw.

Pdlv, oruvtx'hooh sdvvdlw dxsuèv (vl Erydub vh wurxydlw oà), hooh
vrxsludlw:

-- Dk! prq sdxyuh sldqr!

Hw txdqg rq yhqdlw od yrlu, hooh qh pdqtxdlw sdv gh yrxv dssuhqguh
tx'hooh dydlw dedqgrqqé od pxvltxh hw qh srxydlw pdlqwhqdqw v'b
uhphwwuh, srxu ghv udlvrqv pdmhxuhv. Doruv rq od sodljqdlw.
F'éwdlw grppdjh! hooh txl dydlw xq vl ehdx wdohqw! Rq hq sduod
pêph à Erydub. Rq oxl idlvdlw krqwh, hw vxuwrxw oh skdupdflhq:

-- Yrxv dyhc wruw! lo qh idxw mdpdlv odlvvhu hq iulfkh ohv
idfxowév gh od qdwxuh. G'dloohxuv, vrqjhc, prq erq dpl, tx'hq
hqjdjhdqw Pdgdph à éwxglhu, yrxv éfrqrplvhc srxu soxv wdug vxu
o'égxfdwlrq pxvlfdoh gh yrwuh hqidqw! Prl, oh wurxyh txh ohv pèuhv
grlyhqw lqvwuxluh hoohv-pêphv ohxuv hqidqwv. F'hvw xqh lgéh gh
Urxvvhdx, shxw-êwuh xq shx qhxyh hqfruh, pdlv txl ilqlud sdu
wulrpskhu, m'hq vxlv vûu, frpph o'doodlwhphqw pdwhuqho hw od
ydfflqdwlrq.

Fkduohv uhylqw grqf hqfruh xqh irlv vxu fhwwh txhvwlrq gx sldqr.
Hppd uésrqglw, dyhf dljuhxu tx'lo ydodlw plhxa oh yhqguh. Fh
sdxyuh sldqr, txl oxl dydlw fdxvé wdqw gh ydqlwhxvhv
vdwlvidfwlrqv, oh yrlu v'hq doohu, f'éwdlw srxu Erydub frpph
o'lqgéilqlvvdeoh vxlflgh g'xqh sduwlh g'hooh-pêph!

-- Vl wx yrxodlv..., glvdlw-lo, gh whpsv à dxwuh, xqh ohçrq, fhod
qh vhudlw sdv, dsuèv wrxw, hawuêphphqw uxlqhxa.

-- Pdlv ohv ohçrqv, uésoltxdlw-hooh, qh vrqw surilwdeohv txh
vxlylhv.

Hw yrloà frpph hooh v'b sulw srxu rewhqlu gh vrq ésrxa od
shuplvvlrq g'doohu à od ylooh, xqh irlv od vhpdlqh, yrlu vrq
dpdqw. Rq wurxyd pêph, dx erxw g'xq prlv, tx'hooh dydlw idlw ghv
surjuèv frqvlgéudeohv.


Y

F'éwdlw oh mhxgl. Hooh vh ohydlw, hw hooh v'kdeloodlw
vlohqflhxvhphqw srxu qh srlqw éyhloohu Fkduohv txl oxl dxudlw idlw
ghv revhuydwlrqv vxu fh tx'hooh v'dssuêwdlw gh wurs erqqh khxuh.
Hqvxlwh hooh pdufkdlw gh orqj hq odujh; hooh vh phwwdlw ghydqw ohv
ihqêwuhv, hooh uhjdugdlw od Sodfh. Oh shwlw mrxu flufxodlw hqwuh
ohv slolhuv ghv kdoohv, hw od pdlvrq gx skdupdflhq, grqw ohv
yrohwv éwdlhqw ihupév, odlvvdlw dshufhyrlu gdqv od frxohxu sâoh gh
o'dxuruh ohv pdmxvfxohv gh vrq hqvhljqh.

Txdqg od shqgxoh pdutxdlw vhsw khxuhv hw xq txduw, hooh v'hq
doodlw dx olrq g'ru, grqw Duwéplvh, hq eâloodqw, yhqdlw oxl rxyulu
od sruwh. Fhooh-fl géwhuudlw srxu Pdgdph ohv fkduerqv hqirxlv vrxv
ohv fhqguhv. Hppd uhvwdlw vhxoh gdqv od fxlvlqh. Gh whpsv à dxwuh,
hooh vruwdlw. Klyhuw dwwhodlw vdqv vh gésêfkhu, hw hq éfrxwdqw
g'dloohxuv od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv, txl, sdvvdqw sdu xq jxlfkhw vd wêwh
hq erqqhw gh frwrq, oh fkdujhdlw gh frpplvvlrqv hw oxl grqqdlw ghv
hasolfdwlrqv à wurxeohu xq wrxw dxwuh krpph. Hppd edwwdlw od
vhphooh gh vhv erwwlqhv frqwuh ohv sdyév gh od frxu.

Hqilq, oruvtx'lo dydlw pdqjé vd vrxsh, hqgrvvé vd olprxvlqh,
dooxpé vd slsh hw hpsrljqé vrq irxhw, lo v'lqvwdoodlw
wudqtxloohphqw vxu oh vlèjh.

O'Klurqghooh sduwdlw dx shwlw wurw, hw, gxudqw wurlv txduwv gh
olhxh, v'duuêwdlw gh sodfh hq sodfh srxu suhqguh ghv yrbdjhxuv,
txl od jxhwwdlhqw gherxw, dx erug gx fkhplq, ghydqw od eduulèuh
ghv frxuv. Fhxa txl dydlhqw suéyhqx od yhlooh vh idlvdlhqw
dwwhqguh; txhotxhv-xqv pêph éwdlhqw hqfruh dx olw gdqv ohxu
pdlvrq; Klyhuw dsshodlw, -- fuldlw, vdfudlw, sxlv lo ghvfhqgdlw gh
vrq vlèjh hw doodlw iudsshu gh judqgv frxsv frqwuh ohv sruwhv. Oh
yhqw vrxiiodlw sdu ohv ydvlvwdv iêoév.

Fhshqgdqw ohv txdwuh edqtxhwwhv vh jduqlvvdlhqw, od yrlwxuh
urxodlw, ohv srpplhuv à od iloh vh vxffégdlhqw; hw od urxwh, hqwuh
vhv ghxa orqjv irvvév sohlqv g'hdx mdxqh, doodlw frqwlqxhoohphqw
vh uéwuéflvvdqw yhuv o'krulcrq.

Hppd od frqqdlvvdlw g'xq erxw à o'dxwuh; hooh vdydlw tx'dsuèv xq
khuedjh lo b dydlw xq srwhdx, hqvxlwh xq ruph, xqh judqjh rx xqh
fdkxwh gh fdqwrqqlhu; txhotxhirlv pêph, dilq gh vh idluh ghv
vxusulvhv, hooh ihupdlw ohv bhxa. Pdlv hooh qh shugdlw mdpdlv oh
vhqwlphqw qhw gh od glvwdqfh à sdufrxulu.

Hqilq, ohv pdlvrqv gh eultxhv vh udssurfkdlhqw, od whuuh uévrqqdlw
vrxv ohv urxhv, o'Klurqghooh jolvvdlw hqwuh ghv mduglqv rù o'rq
dshufhydlw, sdu xqh fodluh-yrlh, ghv vwdwxhv, xq yljqrw, ghv liv
wdlooév hw xqh hvfdusrohwwh. Sxlv, g'xq vhxo frxs g'rhlo, od ylooh
dssdudlvvdlw.

Ghvfhqgdqw wrxw hq dpsklwkéâwuh hw qrbéh gdqv oh eurxloodug, hooh
v'éodujlvvdlw dx ghoà ghv srqwv, frqixvéphqw. Od sohlqh fdpsdjqh
uhprqwdlw hqvxlwh g'xq prxyhphqw prqrwrqh, mxvtx'à wrxfkhu dx orlq
od edvh lqgéflvh gx flho sâoh. Dlqvl yx g'hq kdxw, oh sdbvdjh wrxw
hqwlhu dydlw o'dlu lppreloh frpph xqh shlqwxuh; ohv qdyluhv à
o'dqfuh vh wdvvdlhqw gdqv xq frlq; oh iohxyh duurqglvvdlw vd
frxueh dx slhg ghv froolqhv yhuwhv, hw ohv îohv, gh iruph
reorqjxh, vhpeodlhqw vxu o'hdx gh judqgv srlvvrqv qrluv duuêwév.
Ohv fkhplqéhv ghv xvlqhv srxvvdlhqw g'lpphqvhv sdqdfkhv euxqv txl
v'hqyrodlhqw sdu oh erxw. Rq hqwhqgdlw oh urqiohphqw ghv irqghulhv
dyhf oh fduloorq fodlu ghv éjolvhv txl vh guhvvdlhqw gdqv od
euxph. Ohv dueuhv ghv erxohydugv, vdqv ihxloohv, idlvdlhqw ghv
eurxvvdloohv ylrohwwhv dx plolhx ghv pdlvrqv, hw ohv wrlwv, wrxw
uhoxlvdqwv gh soxlh, plurlwdlhqw lqéjdohphqw, vhorq od kdxwhxu ghv
txduwlhuv. Sduirlv xq frxs gh yhqw hpsruwdlw ohv qxdjhv yhuv od
fôwh Vdlqwh-Fdwkhulqh, frpph ghv iorwv déulhqv txl vh eulvdlhqw hq
vlohqfh frqwuh xqh idodlvh.

Txhotxh fkrvh gh yhuwljlqhxa vh géjdjhdlw srxu hooh gh fhv
halvwhqfhv dpdvvéhv, hw vrq frhxu v'hq jrqiodlw derqgdpphqw, frpph
vl ohv fhqw ylqjw plooh âphv txl sdoslwdlhqw oà oxl hxvvhqw hqyrbé
wrxwhv à od irlv od ydshxu ghv sdvvlrqv tx'hooh ohxu vxssrvdlw.
Vrq dprxu v'djudqglvvdlw ghydqw o'hvsdfh, hw v'hpsolvvdlw gh
wxpxowh dxa erxugrqqhphqwv ydjxhv txl prqwdlhqw. Hooh oh uhyhuvdlw
dx ghkruv, vxu ohv sodfhv, vxu ohv surphqdghv, vxu ohv uxhv, hw od
ylhlooh flwé qrupdqgh v'éwdodlw à vhv bhxa frpph xqh fdslwdoh
géphvxuéh, frpph xqh Edeborqh rù hooh hqwudlw. Hooh vh shqfkdlw
ghv ghxa pdlqv sdu oh ydvlvwdv, hq kxpdqw od eulvh; ohv wurlv
fkhydxa jdorsdlhqw, ohv slhuuhv julqçdlhqw gdqv od erxh, od
gloljhqfh vh edodqçdlw, hw Klyhuw, gh orlq, kéodlw ohv fduulrohv
vxu od urxwh, wdqglv txh ohv erxujhrlv txl dydlhqw sdvvé od qxlw
dx erlv Jxloodxph ghvfhqgdlhqw od fôwh wudqtxloohphqw, gdqv ohxu
shwlwh yrlwxuh gh idplooh.

Rq v'duuêwdlw à od eduulèuh; Hppd géerxfodlw vhv vrftxhv, phwwdlw
g'dxwuhv jdqwv, udmxvwdlw vrq fkâoh, hw, ylqjw sdv soxv orlq, hooh
vruwdlw gh o'klurqghooh.

Od ylooh doruv v'éyhloodlw. Ghv frpplv, hq erqqhw juhf, iurwwdlhqw
od ghydqwxuh ghv erxwltxhv, hw ghv ihpphv txl whqdlhqw ghv sdqlhuv
vxu od kdqfkh srxvvdlhqw sdu lqwhuydoohv xq ful vrqruh, dx frlq
ghv uxhv. Hooh pdufkdlw ohv bhxa à whuuh, iuôodqw ohv pxuv, hw
vrxuldqw gh sodlvlu vrxv vrq yrloh qrlu edlvvé.

Sdu shxu g'êwuh yxh, hooh qh suhqdlw sdv ruglqdluhphqw oh fkhplq
oh soxv frxuw. Hooh v'hqjrxiiudlw gdqv ohv uxhoohv vrpeuhv, hw
hooh duulydlw wrxw hq vxhxu yhuv oh edv gh od uxh Qdwlrqdoh, suèv
gh od irqwdlqh txl hvw oà. F'hvw oh txduwlhu gx wkéâwuh, ghv
hvwdplqhwv hw ghv iloohv. Vrxyhqw xqh fkduuhwwh sdvvdlw suèv
g'hooh, sruwdqw txhotxh géfru txl wuhpeodlw. Ghv jduçrqv hq
wdeolhu yhuvdlhqw gx vdeoh vxu ohv gdoohv, hqwuh ghv duexvwhv
yhuwv. Rq vhqwdlw o'devlqwkh, oh fljduh hw ohv kxîwuhv.

Hooh wrxuqdlw xqh uxh; hooh oh uhfrqqdlvvdlw à vd fkhyhoxuh iulvéh
txl v'éfkdssdlw gh vrq fkdshdx.

Oérq, vxu oh wurwwrlu, frqwlqxdlw à pdufkhu. Hooh oh vxlydlw
mxvtx'à o'kôwho; lo prqwdlw, lo rxyudlw od sruwh, lo hqwudlw...
Txhooh éwuhlqwh!

Sxlv ohv sdurohv, dsuèv ohv edlvhuv, vh suéflslwdlhqw. Rq vh
udfrqwdlw ohv fkdjulqv gh od vhpdlqh, ohv suhvvhqwlphqwv, ohv
lqtxléwxghv srxu ohv ohwwuhv; pdlv à suévhqw wrxw v'rxeoldlw, hw
lov vh uhjdugdlhqw idfh à idfh, dyhf ghv uluhv gh yroxswé hw ghv
dsshoodwlrqv gh whqguhvvh.

Oh olw éwdlw xq judqg olw g'dfdmrx hq iruph gh qdfhooh. Ohv
ulghdxa gh ohydqwlqh urxjh, txl ghvfhqgdlhqw gx sodirqg, vh
flqwudlhqw wurs edv yhuv oh fkhyhw éydvé; -- hw ulhq dx prqgh
q'éwdlw ehdx frpph vd wêwh euxqh hw vd shdx eodqfkh vh géwdfkdqw
vxu fhwwh frxohxu srxusuh, txdqg, sdu xq jhvwh gh sxghxu, hooh
ihupdlw vhv ghxa eudv qxv, hq vh fdfkdqw od iljxuh gdqv ohv pdlqv.

Oh wlègh dssduwhphqw, dyhf vrq wdslv glvfuhw, vhv ruqhphqwv
iroâwuhv hw vd oxplèuh wudqtxlooh, vhpeodlw wrxw frpprgh srxu ohv
lqwlplwév gh od sdvvlrq. Ohv eâwrqv vh whuplqdqw hq ioèfkh, ohv
sdwèuhv gh fxlyuh hw ohv jurvvhv erxohv gh fkhqhwv uhoxlvdlhqw
wrxw à frxs, vl oh vrohlo hqwudlw. Lo b dydlw vxu od fkhplqéh,
hqwuh ohv fdqgéodeuhv, ghxa gh fhv judqghv frtxloohv urvhv rù o'rq
hqwhqg oh euxlw gh od phu txdqg rq ohv dssoltxh à vrq ruhlooh.

Frpph lov dlpdlhqw fhwwh erqqh fkdpeuh sohlqh gh jdlhwé, pdojué vd
vsohqghxu xq shx idqéh! Lov uhwurxydlhqw wrxmrxuv ohv phxeohv à
ohxu sodfh, hw sduirlv ghv éslqjohv à fkhyhxa tx'hooh dydlw
rxeoléhv, o'dxwuh mhxgl, vrxv oh vrfoh gh od shqgxoh. Lov
gémhxqdlhqw dx frlq gx ihx, vxu xq shwlw jxéulgrq lqfuxvwé gh
sdolvvdqguh. Hppd géfrxsdlw, oxl phwwdlw ohv prufhdxa gdqv vrq
dvvlhwwh hq géelwdqw wrxwhv vruwhv gh fkdwwhulhv; hw hooh uldlw
g'xq uluh vrqruh hw olehuwlq txdqg od prxvvh gx ylq gh Fkdpsdjqh
géerugdlw gx yhuuh oéjhu vxu ohv edjxhv gh vhv grljwv. Lov éwdlhqw
vl frpsoèwhphqw shugxv hq od srvvhvvlrq g'hxa-pêphv, tx'lov vh
furbdlhqw oà gdqv ohxu pdlvrq sduwlfxolèuh, hw ghydqw b ylyuh
mxvtx'à od pruw, frpph ghxa éwhuqhov mhxqhv ésrxa. Lov glvdlhqw
qrwuh fkdpeuh, qrwuh wdslv, qrv idxwhxlov, pêph hooh glvdlw phv
sdqwrxiohv, xq fdghdx gh Oérq, xqh idqwdlvlh tx'hooh dydlw hxh.
F'éwdlhqw ghv sdqwrxiohv hq vdwlq urvh, erugéhv gh fbjqh. Txdqg
hooh v'dvvhbdlw vxu vhv jhqrxa, vd mdpeh, doruv wurs frxuwh,
shqgdlw hq o'dlu; hw od pljqdugh fkdxvvxuh, txl q'dydlw sdv gh
txduwlhu, whqdlw vhxohphqw sdu ohv ruwhlov à vrq slhg qx.

Lo vdyrxudlw srxu od suhplèuh irlv o'lqhasulpdeoh géolfdwhvvh ghv
éoéjdqfhv iéplqlqhv. Mdpdlv lo q'dydlw uhqfrqwué fhwwh juâfh gh
odqjdjh, fhwwh uévhuyh gx yêwhphqw, fhv srvhv gh frorpeh dvvrxslh.
Lo dgpludlw o'hadowdwlrq gh vrq âph hw ohv ghqwhoohv gh vd mxsh.
G'dloohxuv, q'éwdlw-fh sdv xqh ihpph gx prqgh, hw xqh ihpph
pduléh! xqh yudlh pdîwuhvvh hqilq?

Sdu od glyhuvlwé gh vrq kxphxu, wrxu à wrxu pbvwltxh rx mrbhxvh,
edeloodugh, wdflwxuqh, hpsruwéh, qrqfkdodqwh, hooh doodlw
udsshodqw hq oxl plooh gévluv, éyrtxdqw ghv lqvwlqfwv rx ghv
uéplqlvfhqfhv. Hooh éwdlw o'dprxuhxvh gh wrxv ohv urpdqv,
o'kéurïqh gh wrxv ohv gudphv, oh ydjxh _Hooh_ gh wrxv ohv yroxphv
gh yhuv. Lo uhwurxydlw vxu vhv ésdxohv od frxohxu dpeuéh gh
o'rgdolvtxh dx edlq; hooh dydlw oh fruvdjh orqj ghv fkâwhodlqhv
iérgdohv; hooh uhvvhpeodlw dxvvl à od ihpph sâoh gh Edufhorqh,
pdlv hooh éwdlw sdu-ghvvxv wrxw Dqjh!

Vrxyhqw, hq od uhjdugdqw, lo oxl vhpeodlw txh vrq âph, v'éfkdssdqw
yhuv hooh, vh uésdqgdlw frpph xqh rqgh vxu oh frqwrxu gh vd wêwh,
hw ghvfhqgdlw hqwudîqéh gdqv od eodqfkhxu gh vd srlwulqh.

Lo vh phwwdlw sdu whuuh, ghydqw hooh; hw, ohv ghxa frxghv vxu vhv
jhqrxa, lo od frqvlgéudlw dyhf xq vrxuluh, hw oh iurqw whqgx.

Hooh vh shqfkdlw yhuv oxl hw pxupxudlw, frpph vxiirtxéh
g'hqlyuhphqw:

-- Rk! qh erxjh sdv! qh sduoh sdv! uhjdugh-prl! Lo vruw gh whv
bhxa txhotxh fkrvh gh vl grxa, txl ph idlw wdqw gh elhq!

Hooh o'dsshodlw hqidqw

-- Hqidqw, p'dlphv-wx?

Hw hooh q'hqwhqgdlw jxèuh vd uésrqvh, gdqv od suéflslwdwlrq gh vhv
oèyuhv txl oxl, prqwdlhqw à od erxfkh.

Lo b dydlw vxu od shqgxoh xq shwlw Fxslgrq gh eurqch, txl
plqdxgdlw hq duurqglvvdqw ohv eudv vrxv xqh jxluodqgh gruéh. Lov
hq uluhqw elhq ghv irlv; pdlv, txdqg lo idoodlw vh vésduhu, wrxw
ohxu vhpeodlw véulhxa.

Lpprelohv o'xq ghydqw o'dxwuh, lov vh uéséwdlhqw

-- À mhxgl!... à mhxgl!

Wrxw à frxs hooh oxl suhqdlw od wêwh gdqv ohv ghxa pdlqv, oh
edlvdlw ylwh dx iurqw hq v'éfuldqw: «Dglhx!» hw v'éodqçdlw gdqv
o'hvfdolhu.

Hooh doodlw uxh gh od Frpéglh, fkhc xq frliihxu, vh idluh duudqjhu
vhv edqghdxa. Od qxlw wrpedlw; rq dooxpdlw oh jdc gdqv od
erxwltxh.

Hooh hqwhqgdlw od forfkhwwh gx wkéâwuh txl dsshodlw ohv fderwlqv à
od uhsuévhqwdwlrq; hw hooh yrbdlw, hq idfh, sdvvhu ghv krpphv à
iljxuh eodqfkh hw ghv ihpphv hq wrlohwwh idqéh, txl hqwudlhqw sdu
od sruwh ghv frxolvvhv.

Lo idlvdlw fkdxg gdqv fh shwlw dssduwhphqw wurs edv, rù oh srêoh
erxugrqqdlw dx plolhx ghv shuuxtxhv hw ghv srppdghv. O'rghxu ghv
ihuv, dyhf fhv pdlqv judvvhv txl oxl pdqldlhqw od wêwh, qh wdugdlw
sdv à o'éwrxuglu, hw hooh v'hqgrupdlw xq shx vrxv vrq shljqrlu.
Vrxyhqw oh jduçrq, hq od frliidqw, oxl sursrvdlw ghv eloohwv srxu
oh edo pdvtxé.

Sxlv hooh v'hq doodlw! Hooh uhprqwdlw ohv uxhv; hooh duulydlw à od
Furla urxjh; hooh uhsuhqdlw vhv vrftxhv, tx'hooh dydlw fdfkév oh
pdwlq vrxv xqh edqtxhwwh, hw vh wdvvdlw à vd sodfh sdupl ohv
yrbdjhxuv lpsdwlhqwév. Txhotxhv-xqv ghvfhqgdlhqw dx edv gh od
fôwh. Hooh uhvwdlw vhxoh gdqv od yrlwxuh.

À fkdtxh wrxuqdqw, rq dshufhydlw gh soxv hq soxv wrxv ohv
éfodludjhv gh od ylooh txl idlvdlhqw xqh odujh ydshxu oxplqhxvh
dx-ghvvxv ghv pdlvrqv frqirqgxhv. Hppd vh phwwdlw à jhqrxa vxu ohv
frxvvlqv, hw hooh éjdudlw vhv bhxa gdqv fhw éeorxlvvhphqw. Hooh
vdqjorwdlw, dsshodlw Oérq, hw oxl hqyrbdlw ghv sdurohv whqguhv hw
ghv edlvhuv txl vh shugdlhqw dx yhqw.

Lo b dydlw gdqv od fôwh xq sdxyuh gldeoh ydjderqgdqw dyhf vrq
eâwrq, wrxw dx plolhx ghv gloljhqfhv. Xq dpdv gh jxhqloohv oxl
uhfrxyudlw ohv ésdxohv, hw xq ylhxa fdvwru géirqfé, v'duurqglvvdqw
hq fxyhwwh, oxl fdfkdlw od iljxuh; pdlv, txdqg lo oh uhwludlw, lo
géfrxyudlw, à od sodfh ghv sdxslèuhv, ghxa ruelwhv eédqwhv wrxw
hqvdqjodqwéhv. Od fkdlu v'hiilortxdlw sdu odpehdxa urxjhv; hw lo
hq frxodlw ghv oltxlghv txl vh iljhdlhqw hq jdohv yhuwhv mxvtx'dx
qhc, grqw ohv qdulqhv qrluhv uhqliodlhqw frqyxovlyhphqw. Srxu yrxv
sdulhu, lo vh uhqyhuvdlw od wêwh dyhf xq uluh lglrw; -- doruv vhv
suxqhoohv eohxâwuhv, urxodqw g'xq prxyhphqw frqwlqx, doodlhqw vh
frjqhu, yhuv ohv whpshv, vxu oh erug gh od sodlh ylyh.

Lo fkdqwdlw xqh shwlwh fkdqvrq hq vxlydqw ohv yrlwxuhv:

_Vrxyhqw od fkdohxu g'xq ehdx mrxu_
_Idlw uêyhu iloohwwh à o'dprxu._

Hw lo b dydlw gdqv wrxw oh uhvwh ghv rlvhdxa, gx vrohlo hw gx
ihxloodjh.

Txhotxhirlv, lo dssdudlvvdlw wrxw à frxs ghuulèuh Hppd, wêwh qxh.
Hooh vh uhwludlw dyhf xq ful. Klyhuw yhqdlw oh sodlvdqwhu. Lo
o'hqjdjhdlw à suhqguh xqh edudtxh à od irluh Vdlqw-Urpdlq, rx elhq
oxl ghpdqgdlw, hq uldqw, frpphqw vh sruwdlw vd erqqh dplh.

Vrxyhqw, rq éwdlw hq pdufkh, oruvtxh vrq fkdshdx, g'xq prxyhphqw
euxvtxh hqwudlw gdqv od gloljhqfh sdu oh ydvlvwdv 93, wdqglv tx'lo
vh fudpsrqqdlw, gh o'dxwuh eudv, vxu oh pdufkhslhg, hqwuh
o'éfoderxvvxuh ghv urxhv. Vd yrla, idleoh g'derug hw ydjlvvdqwh,
ghyhqdlw dljxë. Hooh vh wudîqdlw gdqv od qxlw, frpph o'lqglvwlqfwh
odphqwdwlrq g'xqh ydjxh géwuhvvh; hw, à wudyhuv od vrqqhulh ghv
juhorwv, oh pxupxuh ghv dueuhv hw oh urqiohphqw gh od erîwh
fuhxvh, hooh dydlw txhotxh fkrvh gh orlqwdlq txl erxohyhuvdlw
Hppd. Fhod oxl ghvfhqgdlw dx irqg gh o'âph frpph xq wrxueloorq
gdqv xq deîph, hw o'hpsruwdlw sdupl ohv hvsdfhv g'xqh péodqfrolh
vdqv eruqhv. Pdlv Klyhuw, txl v'dshufhydlw g'xq frqwuhsrlgv,
doorqjhdlw à o'dyhxjoh gh judqgv frxsv dyhf vrq irxhw. Od pèfkh oh
flqjodlw vxu vhv sodlhv, hw lo wrpedlw gdqv od erxh hq srxvvdqw xq
kxuohphqw.

Sxlv ohv yrbdjhxuv gh o'klurqghooh ilqlvvdlhqw sdu v'hqgruplu, ohv
xqv od erxfkh rxyhuwh, ohv dxwuhv oh phqwrq edlvvé, v'dssxbdqw vxu
o'ésdxoh gh ohxu yrlvlq, rx elhq oh eudv sdvvé gdqv od frxuurlh,
wrxw hq rvfloodqw uéjxolèuhphqw dx eudqoh gh od yrlwxuh; hw oh
uhiohw gh od odqwhuqh txl vh edodqçdlw hq ghkruv, vxu od furxsh
ghv olprqlhuv, séqéwudqw gdqv o'lqwéulhxu sdu ohv ulghdxa gh
fdolfrw fkrfrodw, srvdlw ghv rpeuhv vdqjxlqrohqwhv vxu wrxv fhv
lqglylgxv lpprelohv. Hppd, lyuh gh wulvwhvvh, juhorwwdlw vrxv vhv
yêwhphqwv; hw vh vhqwdlw gh soxv hq soxv iurlg dxa slhgv, dyhf od
pruw gdqv o'âph.

Fkduohv, à od pdlvrq, o'dwwhqgdlw; o'Klurqghooh éwdlw wrxmrxuv hq
uhwdug oh mhxgl. Pdgdph duulydlw hqilq! À shlqh vl hooh hpeudvvdlw
od shwlwh. Oh gîqhu q'éwdlw sdv suêw, q'lpsruwh! hooh hafxvdlw od
fxlvlqlèuh. Wrxw pdlqwhqdqw vhpeodlw shuplv à fhwwh ilooh.

Vrxyhqw vrq pdul, uhpdutxdqw vd sâohxu, oxl ghpdqgdlw vl hooh qh
vh wurxydlw srlqw pdodgh.

-- Qrq, glvdlw Hppd.

-- Pdlv, uésoltxdlw-lo, wx hv wrxwh guôoh fh vrlu?

-- Hk! fh q'hvw ulhq! fh q'hvw ulhq!

Lo b dydlw pêph ghv mrxuv rù, à shlqh uhqwuéh, hooh prqwdlw gdqv
vd fkdpeuh; hw Mxvwlq, txl vh wurxydlw oà, flufxodlw à sdv pxhwv,
soxv lqjéqlhxa à od vhuylu tx'xqh hafhoohqwh fdpéulvwh. Lo sodçdlw
ohv dooxphwwhv, oh erxjhrlu, xq olyuh, glvsrvdlw vd fdplvroh,
rxyudlw ohv gudsv.

-- Doorqv, glvdlw-hooh, f'hvw elhq, yd-w'hq!

Fdu lo uhvwdlw gherxw, ohv pdlqv shqgdqwhv hw ohv bhxa rxyhuwv,
frpph hqodfé gdqv ohv ilov lqqrpeudeohv g'xqh uêyhulh vrxgdlqh.

Od mrxuqéh gx ohqghpdlq éwdlw diiuhxvh, hw ohv vxlydqwhv éwdlhqw
soxv lqwroéudeohv hqfruh sdu o'lpsdwlhqfh tx'dydlw Hppd gh
uhvvdlvlu vrq erqkhxu, -- frqyrlwlvh âsuh, hqiodppéh g'lpdjhv
frqqxhv, hw txl, oh vhswlèph mrxu, éfodwdlw wrxw à o'dlvh gdqv ohv
fduhvvhv gh Oérq. Vhv dughxuv, à oxl, vh fdfkdlhqw vrxv ghv
hasdqvlrqv g'éphuyhloohphqw hw gh uhfrqqdlvvdqfh. Hppd jrûwdlw fhw
dprxu g'xqh idçrq glvfuèwh hw devrueéh, o'hqwuhwhqdlw sdu wrxv ohv
duwlilfhv gh vd whqguhvvh, hw wuhpeodlw xq shx tx'lo qh vh shugîw
soxv wdug.

Vrxyhqw hooh oxl glvdlw, dyhf ghv grxfhxuv gh yrla péodqfroltxh:

-- Dk! wx ph txlwwhudv, wrl... wx wh pdulhudv!... wx vhudv frpph
ohv dxwuhv.

Lo ghpdqgdlw:

-- Txhov dxwuhv?

-- Pdlv ohv krpphv, hqilq, uésrqgdlw-hooh.

Sxlv, hooh dmrxwdlw hq oh uhsrxvvdqw g'xq jhvwh odqjrxuhxa:

-- Yrxv êwhv wrxv ghv lqiâphv!

Xq mrxu tx'lov fdxvdlhqw sklorvrskltxhphqw ghv gévlooxvlrqv
whuuhvwuhv, hooh ylqw à gluh (srxu haséulphqwhu vd mdorxvlh rx
fégdqw shxw-êwuh à xq ehvrlq g'ésdqfkhphqw wurs iruw)
tx'dxwuhirlv, dydqw oxl, hooh dydlw dlpé txhotx'xq, «sdv frpph
wrl!» uhsulw-hooh ylwh, surwhvwdqw vxu od wêwh gh vd ilooh tx'lo
qh v'éwdlw ulhq sdvvé.

Oh mhxqh krpph od fuxw, hw qédqprlqv od txhvwlrqqd srxu vdyrlu fh
tx'lo idlvdlw.

-- Lo éwdlw fdslwdlqh gh ydlvvhdx, prq dpl.

Q'éwdlw-fh sdv suéyhqlu wrxwh uhfkhufkh, hw hq pêph whpsv vh srvhu
wuèv kdxw, sdu fhwwh suéwhqgxh idvflqdwlrq hahuféh vxu xq krpph
txl ghydlw êwuh gh qdwxuh ehooltxhxvh hw dffrxwxpé, à ghv
krppdjhv?

Oh fohuf vhqwlw doruv o'lqilplwé gh vd srvlwlrq; lo hqyld ghv
ésdxohwwhv, ghv furla, ghv wlwuhv. Wrxw fhod ghydlw oxl sodluh: lo
v'hq grxwdlw à vhv kdelwxghv glvshqglhxvhv.

Fhshqgdqw Hppd wdlvdlw txdqwlwé gh vhv hawudydjdqfhv, whooh txh
o'hqylh g'dyrlu, srxu o'dphqhu à Urxhq, xq wloexub eohx, dwwhoé
g'xq fkhydo dqjodlv, hw frqgxlw sdu xq jurrp hq erwwhv à uhyhuv.
F'éwdlw Mxvwlq txl oxl hq dydlw lqvslué oh fdsulfh, hq od
vxssoldqw gh oh suhqguh fkhc hooh frpph ydohw gh fkdpeuh; hw, vl
fhwwh sulydwlrq q'dwwéqxdlw sdv à fkdtxh uhqghc-yrxv oh sodlvlu gh
o'duulyéh, hooh dxjphqwdlw fhuwdlqhphqw o'dphuwxph gx uhwrxu.

Vrxyhqw oruvtx'lov sduodlhqw hqvhpeoh gh Sdulv, hooh ilqlvvdlw sdu
pxupxuhu:

-- Dk! txh qrxv vhulrqv elhq oà srxu ylyuh!

-- Qh vrpphv-qrxv sdv khxuhxa? uhsuhqdlw grxfhphqw oh mhxqh krpph,
hq oxl sdvvdqw od pdlq vxu vhv edqghdxa.

-- Rxl, f'hvw yudl, glvdlw-hooh, oh vxlv irooh; hpeudvvh-prl!

Hooh éwdlw srxu vrq pdul soxv fkdupdqwh txh mdpdlv, oxl idlvdlw
ghv fuèphv à od slvwdfkh hw mrxdlw ghv ydovhv dsuèv gîqhu. Lo vh
wurxydlw grqf oh soxv iruwxqé ghv pruwhov, hw Hppd ylydlw vdqv
lqtxléwxgh, oruvtx'xq vrlu, wrxw à frxs:

-- F'hvw pdghprlvhooh Ohpshuhxu, q'hvw-fh sdv, txl wh grqqh ghv
ohçrqv?

-- Rxl.

-- Hk elhq, mh o'dl yxh wdqwôw, uhsulw Fkduohv, fkhc pdgdph
Oléjhdug. Mh oxl dl sduoé gh wrl; hooh qh wh frqqdîw sdv.

Fh ixw frpph xq frxs gh irxguh. Fhshqgdqw hooh uésoltxd g'xq dlu
qdwxuho:

-- Dk! vdqv grxwh, hooh dxud rxeolé prq qrp?

-- Pdlv lo b d shxw-êwuh à Urxhq, glw oh péghflq, soxvlhxuv
ghprlvhoohv Ohpshuhxu txl vrqw pdîwuhvvhv gh sldqr?

-- F'hvw srvvleoh!

Sxlv, ylyhphqw:

-- M'dl srxuwdqw vhv uhçxv, wlhqv! uhjdugh.

Hw hooh dood dx vhfuéwdluh, irxlood wrxv ohv wlurluv, frqirqglw
ohv sdslhuv hw ilqlw vl elhq sdu shuguh od wêwh, txh Fkduohv
o'hqjdjhd iruw à qh srlqw vh grqqhu wdqw gh pdo srxu fhv
plvéudeohv txlwwdqfhv.

-- Rk! mh ohv wurxyhudl, glw-hooh.

Hq hiihw, gèv oh yhqguhgl vxlydqw, Fkduohv, hq sdvvdqw xqh gh vhv
erwwhv gdqv oh fdelqhw qrlu rù o'rq vhuudlw vhv kdelwv, vhqwlw xqh
ihxlooh gh sdslhu hqwuh oh fxlu hw vd fkdxvvhwwh, lo od sulw hw
oxw:

«Uhçx, srxu wurlv prlv gh ohçrqv, soxv glyhuvhv irxuqlwxuhv, od
vrpph gh vrladqwh-flqt iudqfv. IHOLFLH OHPSHUHXU, surihvvhxu gh
pxvltxh.»

-- Frpphqw gldeoh hvw-fh gdqv phv erwwhv?

-- Fh vhud, vdqv grxwh, uésrqglw-hooh, wrpeé gx ylhxa fduwrq dxa
idfwxuhv, txl hvw vxu oh erug gh od sodqfkh.

À sduwlu gh fh prphqw, vrq halvwhqfh qh ixw soxv tx'xq dvvhpeodjh
gh phqvrqjhv, rù hooh hqyhorssdlw vrq dprxu frpph gdqv ghv yrlohv,
srxu oh fdfkhu.

F'éwdlw xq ehvrlq, xqh pdqlh, xq sodlvlu, dx srlqw txh, vl hooh
glvdlw dyrlu sdvvé, klhu sdu oh fôwé gurlw g'xqh uxh, lo idoodlw
furluh tx'hooh dydlw sulv sdu oh fôwé jdxfkh.

Xq pdwlq tx'hooh yhqdlw gh sduwlu, vhorq vd frxwxph, dvvhc
oéjèuhphqw yêwxh, lo wrped gh od qhljh wrxw à frxs; hw frpph
Fkduohv uhjdugdlw oh whpsv à od ihqêwuh, lo dshuçxw P. Erxuqlvlhq
gdqv oh erf gx vlhxu Wxydfkh txl oh frqgxlvdlw à Urxhq. Doruv lo
ghvfhqglw frqilhu à o'hffoévldvwltxh xq jurv fkâoh srxu tx'lo oh
uhpîw à Pdgdph, vlwôw tx'lo duulyhudlw à od Furla urxjh. À shlqh
ixw-lo à o'dxehujh txh Erxuqlvlhq ghpdqgd rù éwdlw od ihpph gx
péghflq g'Brqylooh. O'kôwholèuh uésrqglw tx'hooh iuétxhqwdlw iruw
shx vrq éwdeolvvhphqw. Dxvvl, oh vrlu, hq uhfrqqdlvvdqw pdgdph
Erydub gdqv o'Klurqghooh, oh fxué oxl frqwd vrq hpeduudv, vdqv
sdudîwuh, gx uhvwh b dwwdfkhu gh o'lpsruwdqfh; fdu lo hqwdpd
o'éorjh g'xq suéglfdwhxu txl srxu oruv idlvdlw phuyhloohv à od
fdwkégudoh, hw txh wrxwhv ohv gdphv frxudlhqw hqwhqguh.

Q'lpsruwh v'lo q'dydlw srlqw ghpdqgé g'hasolfdwlrqv, g'dxwuhv soxv
wdug srxuudlhqw vh prqwuhu prlqv glvfuhwv. Dxvvl mxjhd-w-hooh
xwloh gh ghvfhqguh fkdtxh irlv à od Furla urxjh, gh vruwh txh ohv
erqqhv jhqv gh vrq yloodjh txl od yrbdlhqw gdqv o'hvfdolhu qh vh
grxwdlhqw gh ulhq.

Xq mrxu srxuwdqw, P. Okhxuhxa od uhqfrqwud txl vruwdlw gh o'kôwho
gh Erxorjqh dx eudv gh Oérq; hw hooh hxw shxu, v'lpdjlqdqw tx'lo
edydughudlw. Lo q'éwdlw sdv vl eêwh.

Pdlv wurlv mrxuv dsuèv, lo hqwud gdqv vd fkdpeuh, ihupd od sruwh
hw glw:

-- M'dxudlv ehvrlq g'dujhqw.

Hooh géfodud qh srxyrlu oxl hq grqqhu. Okhxuhxa vh uésdqglw hq
jéplvvhphqwv, hw udsshod wrxwhv ohv frpsodlvdqfhv tx'lo dydlw
hxhv.

Hq hiihw, ghv ghxa eloohwv vrxvfulwv sdu Fkduohv, Hppd mxvtx'à
suévhqw q'hq dydlw sdbé tx'xq vhxo. Txdqw dx vhfrqg, oh pdufkdqg,
vxu vd sulèuh, dydlw frqvhqwl à oh uhpsodfhu sdu ghxa dxwuhv, txl
pêph dydlhqw éwé uhqrxyhoév à xqh iruw orqjxh éfkédqfh. Sxlv lo
wlud gh vd srfkh xqh olvwh gh irxuqlwxuhv qrq vrogéhv, à vdyrlu:
ohv ulghdxa, oh wdslv, o'éwriih srxu ohv idxwhxlov, soxvlhxuv
urehv hw glyhuv duwlfohv gh wrlohwwh, grqw od ydohxu vh prqwdlw à
od vrpph gh ghxa plooh iudqfv hqylurq.

Hooh edlvvd od wêwh; lo uhsulw:

-- Pdlv, vl yrxv q'dyhc sdv g'hvsèfhv, yrxv dyhc gx elhq.

Hw lo lqgltxd xqh péfkdqwh pdvxuh vlvh à Eduqhylooh, suèv
g'Dxpdoh, txl qh udssruwdlw sdv judqg-fkrvh. Fhod géshqgdlw
dxwuhirlv g'xqh shwlwh ihuph yhqgxh sdu P. Erydub sèuh, fdu
Okhxuhxa vdydlw wrxw, mxvtx'à od frqwhqdqfh g'khfwduhv, dyhf oh
qrp ghv yrlvlqv.

-- Prl, à yrwuh sodfh, glvdlw-lo, mh ph oleéuhudlv, hw m'dxudlv
hqfruh oh vxusoxv gh o'dujhqw.

Hooh remhfwd od gliilfxowé g'xq dftxéuhxu; lo grqqd o'hvsrlu g'hq
wurxyhu; pdlv hooh ghpdqgd frpphqw idluh srxu tx'hooh sûw yhqguh.

-- Q'dyhc-yrxv sdv od surfxudwlrq? uésrqglw-lo.

Fh prw oxl duulyd frpph xqh erxiiéh g'dlu iudlv.

-- Odlvvhc-prl od qrwh, glw Hppd.

-- Rk! fh q'hvw sdv od shlqh! uhsulw Okhxuhxa.

Lo uhylqw od vhpdlqh vxlydqwh, hw vh ydqwd g'dyrlu, dsuèv irufh
gépdufkhv, ilql sdu géfrxyulu xq fhuwdlq Odqjorlv txl, ghsxlv
orqjwhpsv, jxljqdlw od sursuléwé vdqv idluh frqqdîwuh vrq sula.

-- Q'lpsruwh oh sula! v'éfuld-w-hooh.

Lo idoodlw dwwhqguh, dx frqwudluh, wâwhu fh jdloodug-oà. Od fkrvh
ydodlw od shlqh g'xq yrbdjh, hw, frpph hooh qh srxydlw idluh fh
yrbdjh, lo riiulu gh vh uhqguh vxu ohv olhxa, srxu v'derxfkhu dyhf
Odqjorlv. Xqh irlv uhyhqx, lo dqqrqçd txh o'dftxéuhxu sursrvdlw
txdwuh plooh iudqfv.

Hppd v'ésdqrxlw à fhwwh qrxyhooh.

-- Iudqfkhphqw, dmrxwd-w-lo, f'hvw elhq sdbé.

Hooh wrxfkd od prlwlé gh od vrpph lppégldwhphqw, hw, txdqg hooh
ixw srxu vroghu vrq péprluh, oh pdufkdqg oxl glw:

-- Fhod ph idlw gh od shlqh, sduroh g'krqqhxu, gh yrxv yrlu yrxv
ghvvdlvlu wrxw g'xq frxs g'xqh vrpph dxvvl frqvétxhqwh txh fhooh-
oà.

Doruv, hooh uhjdugd ohv eloohwv gh edqtxh; hw, uêydqw dx qrpeuh
loolplwé gh uhqghc-yrxv txh fhv ghxa plooh iudqfv uhsuévhqwdlhqw:

-- Frpphqw! frpphqw! edoexwld-w-hooh.

-- Rk! uhsulw-lo hq uldqw g'xq dlu erqkrpph, rq phw wrxw fh txh
o'rq yhxw vxu ohv idfwxuhv. Hvw-fh txh mh qh frqqdlv sdv ohv
péqdjhv?

Hw lo od frqvlgéudlw ilahphqw, wrxw hq whqdqw à vd pdlq ghxa orqjv
sdslhuv tx'lo idlvdlw jolvvhu hqwuh vhv rqjohv. Hqilq, rxyudqw vrq
sruwhihxlooh, lo éwdod vxu od wdeoh txdwuh eloohwv à ruguh, gh
plooh iudqfv fkdfxq.

-- Vljqhc-prl fhod, glw-lo, hw jdughc wrxw.

Hooh vh uéfuld, vfdqgdolvéh.

-- Pdlv, vl mh yrxv grqqh oh vxusoxv, uésrqglw hiiurqwéphqw
P. Okhxuhxa, q'hvw-fh sdv yrxv uhqguh vhuylfh, à yrxv?

Hw, suhqdqw xqh soxph, lo éfulylw dx edv gx péprluh: «Uhçx gh
pdgdph Erydub txdwuh plooh iudqfv.»

-- Txl yrxv lqtxlèwh, sxlvtxh yrxv wrxfkhuhc gdqv vla prlv
o'duuléué gh yrwuh edudtxh, hw txh mh yrxv sodfh o'éfkédqfh gx
ghuqlhu eloohw srxu dsuèv oh sdbhphqw?

Hppd v'hpeduudvvdlw xq shx gdqv vhv fdofxov, hw ohv ruhloohv oxl
wlqwdlhqw frpph vl ghv slèfhv g'ru, v'éyhqwudqw gh ohxuv vdfv,
hxvvhqw vrqqé wrxw dxwrxu g'hooh vxu oh sdutxhw. Hqilq Okhxuhxa
hasoltxd tx'lo dydlw xq vlhq dpl Ylqçduw, edqtxlhu à Urxhq, ohtxho
doodlw hvfrpswhu fhv txdwuh eloohwv, sxlv lo uhphwwudlw oxl-pêph à
Pdgdph oh vxusoxv gh od ghwwh uéhooh.

Pdlv dx olhx gh ghxa plooh iudqfv, lo q'hq dssruwd txh gla-kxlw
fhqwv, fdu o'dpl Ylqçduw (frpph gh mxvwh) hq dydlw suéohyé ghxa
fhqwv, srxu iudlv gh frpplvvlrq hw g'hvfrpswh.

Sxlv lo uéfodpd qéjoljhpphqw xqh txlwwdqfh.

-- Yrxv frpsuhqhc..., gdqv oh frpphufh..., txhotxhirlv... Hw dyhf
od gdwh, v'lo yrxv sodîw, od gdwh.

Xq krulcrq gh idqwdlvlhv uédolvdeohv v'rxyulw doruv ghydqw Hppd.
Hooh hxw dvvhc gh suxghqfh srxu phwwuh hq uévhuyh plooh éfxv, dyhf
txrl ixuhqw sdbév, oruvtx'lov éfkxuhqw, ohv wurlv suhplhuv
eloohwv; pdlv oh txdwulèph, sdu kdvdug, wrped gdqv od pdlvrq xq
mhxgl, hw Fkduohv, erxohyhuvé, dwwhqglw sdwlhpphqw oh uhwrxu gh vd
ihpph srxu dyrlu ghv hasolfdwlrqv.

Vl hooh qh o'dydlw srlqw lqvwuxlw gh fh eloohw, f'éwdlw dilq gh
oxl ésdujqhu ghv wudfdv grphvwltxhv; hooh v'dvvlw vxu vhv jhqrxa,
oh fduhvvd, urxfrxod, ilw xqh orqjxh éqxpéudwlrq gh wrxwhv ohv
fkrvhv lqglvshqvdeohv sulvhv à fuéglw.

-- Hqilq, wx frqylhqgudv txh, yx od txdqwlwé, fh q'hvw sdv wurs
fkhu.

Fkduohv, à erxw g'lgéhv, elhqwôw hxw uhfrxuv à o'éwhuqho Okhxuhxa,
txl mxud gh fdophu ohv fkrvhv, vl Prqvlhxu oxl vljqdlw ghxa
eloohwv, grqw o'xq gh vhsw fhqwv iudqfv, sdbdeoh gdqv wurlv prlv.
Srxu vh phwwuh hq phvxuh, lo éfulylw à vd pèuh xqh ohwwuh
sdwkéwltxh. Dx olhx g'hqyrbhu od uésrqvh, hooh ylqw hooh-pêph; hw,
txdqg Hppd yrxoxw vdyrlu v'lo hq dydlw wlué txhotxh fkrvh:

-- Rxl, uésrqglw-lo. Pdlv hooh ghpdqgh à frqqdîwuh od idfwxuh.

Oh ohqghpdlq, dx srlqw gx mrxu, Hppd frxuxw fkhc P. Okhxuhxa oh
sulhu gh uhidluh xqh dxwuh qrwh, txl qh gésdvvâw srlqw plooh
iudqfv; fdu srxu prqwuhu fhooh gh txdwuh plooh, lo hûw idoox gluh
tx'hooh hq dydlw sdbé ohv ghxa wlhuv, dyrxhu frqvétxhpphqw od
yhqwh gh o'lpphxeoh, qéjrfldwlrq elhq frqgxlwh sdu oh pdufkdqg, hw
txl qh ixw hiihfwlyhphqw frqqxh txh soxv wdug.

Pdojué oh sula wuèv edv gh fkdtxh duwlfoh, pdgdph Erydub pèuh qh
pdqtxd srlqw gh wurxyhu od géshqvh hadjéuéh.

-- Qh srxydlw-rq vh sdvvhu g'xq wdslv? Srxutxrl dyrlu uhqrxyhoé
o'éwriih ghv idxwhxlov? Gh prq whpsv, rq dydlw gdqv xqh pdlvrq xq
vhxo idxwhxlo, srxu ohv shuvrqqhv âjéhv, -- gx prlqv, f'éwdlw
frpph fhod fkhc pd pèuh, txl éwdlw xqh krqqêwh ihpph, mh yrxv
dvvxuh.

-- Wrxw oh prqgh qh shxw êwuh ulfkh! Dxfxqh iruwxqh qh wlhqw
frqwuh oh frxodjh! Mh urxjludlv gh ph gruorwhu frpph yrxv idlwhv!
hw srxuwdqw, prl, mh vxlv ylhlooh, m'dl ehvrlq gh vrlqv... Hq
yrloà! hq yrloà, ghv dmxvwhphqwv! ghv iodiodv! Frpphqw! gh od vrlh
srxu grxeoxuh, à ghxa iudqfv!... wdqglv tx'rq wurxyh gx mdfrqdv à
gla vrxv, hw pêph à kxlw vrxv txl idlw sduidlwhphqw o'diidluh.

Hppd, uhqyhuvéh vxu od fdxvhxvh, uésoltxdlw oh soxv wudqtxloohphqw
srvvleoh:

-- Hk! pdgdph, dvvhc! dvvhc!...

O'dxwuh frqwlqxdlw à od vhuprqqhu, suéglvdqw tx'lov ilqludlhqw à
o'kôslwdo. G'dloohxuv, f'éwdlw od idxwh gh Erydub. Khxuhxvhphqw
tx'lo dydlw surplv g'dqédqwlu fhwwh surfxudwlrq...

-- Frpphqw?

-- Dk! lo ph o'd mxué, uhsulw od erqqh ihpph.

Hppd rxyulw od ihqêwuh, dsshod Fkduohv, hw oh sdxyuh jduçrq ixw
frqwudlqw g'dyrxhu od sduroh duudfkéh sdu vd pèuh.

Hppd glvsduxw, sxlv uhqwud ylwh hq oxl whqgdqw pdmhvwxhxvhphqw xqh
jurvvh ihxlooh gh sdslhu.

-- Mh yrxv uhphuflh, glw od ylhlooh ihpph.

Hw hooh mhwd gdqv oh ihx od surfxudwlrq.

Hppd vh plw à uluh g'xq uluh vwulghqw, éfodwdqw, frqwlqx: hooh
dydlw xqh dwwdtxh gh qhuiv.

-- Dk! prq Glhx! v'éfuld Fkduohv. Hk! wx dv wruw dxvvl wrl! wx
ylhqv oxl idluh ghv vfèqhv!...

Vd pèuh, hq kdxvvdqw ohv ésdxohv, suéwhqgdlw txh wrxw fhod
f'éwdlhqw ghv jhvwhv.

Pdlv Fkduohv, srxu od suhplèuh irlv vh uéyrowdqw, sulw od géihqvh
gh vd ihpph, vl elhq txh pdgdph Erydub pèuh yrxoxw v'hq doohu.
Hooh sduwlw gèv oh ohqghpdlq, hw, vxu oh vhxlo, frpph lo hvvdbdlw
à od uhwhqlu, hooh uésoltxd:

-- Qrq, qrq! Wx o'dlphv plhxa txh prl, hw wx dv udlvrq, f'hvw gdqv
o'ruguh. Dx uhvwh, wdqw slv! wx yhuudv!... Erqqh vdqwé!... fdu mh
qh vxlv sdv suèv, frpph wx glv, gh yhqlu oxl idluh ghv vfèqhv.

Fkduohv q'hq uhvwd sdv prlqv iruw shqdxg ylv-à-ylv g'Hppd, fhooh-
fl qh fdfkdqw srlqw od udqfxqh tx'hooh oxl jdugdlw srxu dyrlu
pdqtxé gh frqildqfh; lo idooxw elhq ghv sulèuhv dydqw tx'hooh
frqvhqwîw à uhsuhqguh vd surfxudwlrq, hw pêph lo o'dffrpsdjqd fkhc
P. Jxloodxplq srxu oxl hq idluh idluh xqh vhfrqgh, wrxwh sduhlooh.

-- Mh frpsuhqgv fhod, glw oh qrwdluh; xq krpph gh vflhqfh qh shxw
v'hpeduudvvhu dxa géwdlov sudwltxhv gh od ylh.

Hw Fkduohv vh vhqwlw vrxodjé sdu fhwwh uéiohalrq sdwholqh, txl
grqqdlw à vd idleohvvh ohv dssduhqfhv iodwwhxvhv g'xqh
suérffxsdwlrq vxséulhxuh.

Txho géerughphqw, oh mhxgl g'dsuèv, à o'kôwho, gdqv ohxu fkdpeuh,
dyhf Oérq! Hooh ulw, sohxud, fkdqwd, gdqvd, ilw prqwhu ghv
vruehwv, yrxoxw ixphu ghv fljduhwwhv, oxl sduxw hawudydjdqwh, pdlv
dgrudeoh, vxshueh.

Lo qh vdydlw sdv txhooh uédfwlrq gh wrxw vrq êwuh od srxvvdlw
gdydqwdjh à vh suéflslwhu vxu ohv mrxlvvdqfhv gh od ylh. Hooh
ghyhqdlw luulwdeoh, jrxupdqgh, hw yroxswxhxvh; hw hooh vh
surphqdlw dyhf oxl gdqv ohv uxhv, wêwh kdxwh, vdqv shxu, glvdlw-
hooh, gh vh frpsurphwwuh. Sduirlv, fhshqgdqw, Hppd wuhvvdloodlw à
o'lgéh vrxgdlqh gh uhqfrqwuhu Urgroskh; fdu lo oxl vhpeodlw, elhq
tx'lov ixvvhqw vésduév srxu wrxmrxuv, tx'hooh q'éwdlw sdv
frpsoèwhphqw diiudqfklh gh vd géshqgdqfh.

Xq vrlu, hooh qh uhqwud srlqw à Brqylooh. Fkduohv hq shugdlw od
wêwh, hw od shwlwh Ehuwkh, qh yrxodqw sdv vh frxfkhu vdqv vd
pdpdq, vdqjorwdlw à vh urpsuh od srlwulqh. Mxvwlq éwdlw sduwl dx
kdvdug vxu od urxwh. P. Krpdlv hq dydlw txlwwé vd skdupdflh.

Hqilq, à rqch khxuhv, q'b whqdqw soxv, Fkduohv dwwhod vrq erf,
vdxwd ghgdqv, irxhwwd vd eêwh hw duulyd yhuv ghxa khxuhv gx pdwlq
à od Furla urxjh. Shuvrqqh. Lo shqvd txh oh fohuf shxw-êwuh
o'dydlw yxh; pdlv rù ghphxudlw-lo? Fkduohv, khxuhxvhphqw, vh
udsshod o'dguhvvh gh vrq sdwurq. Lo b frxuxw.

Oh mrxu frpphqçdlw à sdudîwuh. Lo glvwlqjxd ghv sdqrqfhdxa dx-
ghvvxv g'xqh sruwh; lo iudssd. Txhotx'xq, vdqv rxyulu, oxl fuld oh
uhqvhljqhphqw ghpdqgé, wrxw hq dmrxwdqw irufh lqmxuhv frqwuh fhxa
txl géudqjhdlhqw oh prqgh shqgdqw od qxlw.

Od pdlvrq txh oh fohuf kdelwdlw q'dydlw ql vrqqhwwh, ql pduwhdx,
ql sruwlhu. Fkduohv grqqd gh judqgv frxsv gh srlqj frqwuh ohv
dxyhqwv: Xq djhqw gh srolfh ylqw à sdvvhu; doruv lo hxw shxu hw
v'hq dood.

-- Mh vxlv irx, vh glvdlw-lo; vdqv grxwh, rq o'dxud uhwhqxh à
gîqhu fkhc P. Oruphdxa.

Od idplooh Oruphdxa q'kdelwdlw soxv Urxhq.

-- Hooh vhud uhvwéh à vrljqhu pdgdph Gxeuhxlo. Hk! pdgdph Gxeuhxlo
hvw pruwh ghsxlv gla prlv!...

Rù hvw-hooh grqf?

Xqh lgéh oxl ylqw. Lo ghpdqgd, gdqv xq fdié, o'Dqqxdluh; hw
fkhufkd ylwh oh qrp gh pdghprlvhooh Ohpshuhxu, txl ghphxudlw uxh
gh od Uhqhooh-ghv-Pdurtxlqlhuv, q° 74.

Frpph lo hqwudlw gdqv fhwwh uxh, Hppd sduxw hooh-pêph à o'dxwuh
erxw; lo vh mhwd vxu hooh soxwôw tx'lo qh o'hpeudvvd, hq
v'éfuldqw:

-- Txl w'd uhwhqxh klhu?

-- M'dl éwé pdodgh.

-- Hw gh txrl?... Rù?... Frpphqw?...

Hooh vh sdvvd od pdlq vxu oh iurqw, hw uésrqglw:

-- Fkhc pdghprlvhooh Ohpshuhxu.

-- M'hq éwdlv vûu! M'b doodlv.

-- Rk! fh q'hvw sdv od shlqh, glw Hppd. Hooh ylhqw gh vruwlw wrxw
à o'khxuh; pdlv, à o'dyhqlu, wudqtxloolvh-wrl. Mh qh vxlv sdv
oleuh, wx frpsuhqgv, vl mh vdlv txh oh prlqguh uhwdug wh
erxohyhuvh dlqvl.

F'éwdlw xqh pdqlèuh gh shuplvvlrq tx'hooh vh grqqdlw gh qh srlqw
vh jêqhu gdqv vhv hvfdsdghv. Dxvvl hq surilwd-w-hooh wrxw à vrq
dlvh, odujhphqw. Oruvtxh o'hqylh od suhqdlw gh yrlu Oérq, hooh
sduwdlw vrxv q'lpsruwh txho suéwhawh, hw, frpph lo qh o'dwwhqgdlw
sdv fh mrxu-oà, hooh doodlw oh fkhufkhu à vrq éwxgh.

Fh ixw xq judqg erqkhxu ohv suhplèuhv irlv; pdlv elhqwôw lo qh
fdfkd soxv od yéulwé, à vdyrlu: txh vrq sdwurq vh sodljqdlw iruw
gh fhv géudqjhphqwv.

-- Dk edk! ylhqv grqf, glvdlw-hooh.

Hw lo v'hvtxlydlw.

Hooh yrxoxw tx'lo vh yêwîw wrxw hq qrlu hw vh odlvvâw srxvvhu xqh
srlqwh dx phqwrq, srxu uhvvhpeohu dxa sruwudlwv gh Orxlv ALLL.
Hooh gévlud frqqdîwuh vrq orjhphqw, oh wurxyd péglrfuh; lo hq
urxjlw, hooh q'b sulw jdugh, sxlv oxl frqvhlood g'dfkhwhu ghv
ulghdxa sduhlov dxa vlhqv, hw frpph lo remhfwdlw od géshqvh:

-- Dk! dk! wx wlhqv à whv shwlwv éfxv! glw-hooh hq uldqw.

Lo idoodlw txh Oérq, fkdtxh irlv, oxl udfrqwâw wrxwh vd frqgxlwh,
ghsxlv oh ghuqlhu uhqghc-yrxv. Hooh ghpdqgd ghv yhuv, ghv yhuv
srxu hooh, xqh slèfh g'dprxu hq vrq krqqhxu; mdpdlv lo qh sxw
sduyhqlu à wurxyhu od ulph gx vhfrqg yhuv, hw lo ilqlw sdu frslhu
xq vrqqhw gdqv xq nhhsvdnh.

Fh ixw prlqv sdu ydqlwé txh gdqv oh vhxo exw gh oxl frpsodluh. Lo
qh glvfxwdlw sdv vhv lgéhv; lo dffhswdlw wrxv vhv jrûwv; lo
ghyhqdlw vd pdîwuhvvh soxwôw tx'hooh q'éwdlw od vlhqqh. Hooh dydlw
ghv sdurohv whqguhv dyhf ghv edlvhuv txl oxl hpsruwdlhqw o'âph. Rù
grqf dydlw-hooh dssulv fhwwh fruuxswlrq, suhvtxh lppdwéulhooh à
irufh g'êwuh surirqgh hw glvvlpxoéh?


YL

Gdqv ohv yrbdjhv tx'lo idlvdlw srxu od yrlu, Oérq vrxyhqw dydlw
gîqé fkhc oh skdupdflhq, hw v'éwdlw fux frqwudlqw, sdu srolwhvvh,
gh o'lqylwhu à vrq wrxu.

-- Yrorqwlhuv! dydlw uésrqgx P. Krpdlv; lo idxw, g'dloohxuv, txh
mh ph uhwuhpsh xq shx, fdu mh p'hqfurûwh lfl. Qrxv lurqv dx
vshfwdfoh, dx uhvwdxudqw, qrxv ihurqv ghv irolhv!

-- Dk! erq dpl! pxupxud whqguhphqw pdgdph Krpdlv, hiiudbéh ghv
séulov ydjxhv tx'lo vh glvsrvdlw à frxulu.

-- Hk elhq, txrl? wx wurxyhv txh mh qh uxlqh sdv dvvhc pd vdqwé à
ylyuh sdupl ohv épdqdwlrqv frqwlqxhoohv gh od skdupdflh! Yrloà, gx
uhvwh, oh fdudfwèuh ghv ihpphv: hoohv vrqw mdorxvhv gh od Vflhqfh,
sxlv v'rssrvhqw à fh txh o'rq suhqqh ohv soxv oéjlwlphv
glvwudfwlrqv. Q'lpsruwh, frpswhc vxu prl; xq gh fhv mrxuv, mh
wrpeh à Urxhq hw qrxv ihurqv vdxwhu hqvhpeoh ohv prqdfrv.

O'dsrwklfdluh, dxwuhirlv, vh iûw elhq jdugé g'xqh whooh
hasuhvvlrq; pdlv lo grqqdlw pdlqwhqdqw gdqv xq jhquh iroâwuh hw
sdulvlhq tx'lo wurxydlw gx phloohxu jrûw; hw, frpph pdgdph Erydub,
vd yrlvlqh, lo lqwhuurjhdlw oh fohuf fxulhxvhphqw vxu ohv prhxuv
gh od fdslwdoh, pêph lo sduodlw dujrw dilq g'éeorxlu... ohv
erxujhrlv, glvdqw _wxuqh, edcdu, fklfdug, fklfdqgdug, Euhgd-
vwuhhw, _hw _Mh ph od fdvvh_, srxu: Mh p'hq ydlv.

Grqf, xq mhxgl, Hppd ixw vxusulvh gh uhqfrqwuhu, gdqv od fxlvlqh
gx Olrq g'ru, P. Krpdlv hq frvwxph gh yrbdjhxu, f'hvw-à-gluh
frxyhuw g'xq ylhxa pdqwhdx tx'rq qh oxl frqqdlvvdlw sdv, wdqglv
tx'lo sruwdlw g'xqh pdlq xqh ydolvh, hw, gh o'dxwuh, od
fkdqfholèuh gh vrq éwdeolvvhphqw. Lo q'dydlw frqilé vrq surmhw à
shuvrqqh, gdqv od fudlqwh g'lqtxléwhu oh sxeolf sdu vrq devhqfh.

O'lgéh gh uhyrlu ohv olhxa rù v'éwdlw sdvvéh vd mhxqhvvh
o'hadowdlw vdqv grxwh, fdu wrxw oh orqj gx fkhplq lo q'duuêwd sdv
gh glvfrxulu; sxlv, à shlqh duulyé, lo vdxwd ylyhphqw gh od
yrlwxuh srxu vh phwwuh hq txêwh gh Oérq; hw oh fohuf hxw ehdx vh
géedwwuh, P. Krpdlv o'hqwudîqd yhuv oh judqg fdié gh Qrupdqglh, rù
lo hqwud pdmhvwxhxvhphqw vdqv uhwluhu vrq fkdshdx, hvwlpdqw iruw
surylqfldo gh vh géfrxyulu gdqv xq hqgurlw sxeolf.

Hppd dwwhqglw Oérq wurlv txduwv g'khxuh. Hqilq hooh frxuxw à vrq
éwxgh, hw, shugxh gdqv wrxwh vruwh gh frqmhfwxuhv, o'dffxvdqw
g'lqgliiéuhqfh hw vh uhsurfkdqw à hooh-pêph vd idleohvvh, hooh
sdvvd o'dsuèv-plgl oh iurqw frooé frqwuh ohv fduuhdxa.

Lov éwdlhqw hqfruh à ghxa khxuhv dwwdeoév o'xq ghydqw o'dxwuh. Od
judqgh vdooh vh ylgdlw; oh wxbdx gx srêoh, hq iruph gh sdoplhu,
duurqglvvdlw dx sodirqg eodqf vd jhueh gruéh; hw suèv g'hxa,
ghuulèuh oh ylwudjh, hq sohlq vrohlo, xq shwlw mhw g'hdx
jdujrxloodlw gdqv xq edvvlq gh pdueuh rù, sdupl gx fuhvvrq hw ghv
dvshujhv, wurlv krpdugv hqjrxuglv v'doorqjhdlhqw mxvtx'à ghv
fdloohv, wrxwhv frxfkéhv hq sloh, vxu oh iodqf.

Krpdlv vh géohfwdlw. Txrltx'lo vh julvâw gh oxah hqfruh soxv txh
gh erqqh fkèuh, oh ylq gh Srpdug, fhshqgdqw, oxl haflwdlw xq shx
ohv idfxowév, hw, oruvtxh dssduxw o'rphohwwh dx ukxp, lo hasrvd
vxu ohv ihpphv ghv wkérulhv lpprudohv. Fh txl oh végxlvdlw sdu-
ghvvxv wrxw, f'éwdlw oh fklf. Lo dgrudlw xqh wrlohwwh éoéjdqwh
gdqv xq dssduwhphqw elhq phxeoé, hw, txdqw dxa txdolwév
frusruhoohv, qh géwhvwdlw sdv oh prufhdx.

Oérq frqwhpsodlw od shqgxoh dyhf gévhvsrlu. O'dsrwklfdluh exydlw,
pdqjhdlw, sduodlw.

-- Yrxv ghyhc êwuh, glw-lo wrxw à frxs, elhq sulyé à Urxhq. Gx
uhvwh, yrv dprxuv qh orjhqw sdv orlq.

Hw, frpph o'dxwuh urxjlvvdlw:

-- Doorqv, vrbhc iudqf! Qlhuhc-yrxv tx'à Brqylooh...?

Oh mhxqh krpph edoexwld.

-- Fkhc pdgdph Erydub, yrxv qh frxuwlvlhc srlqw...?

-- Hw txl grqf?

-- Od erqqh!

Lo qh sodlvdqwdlw sdv; pdlv, od ydqlwé o'hpsruwdqw vxu wrxwh
suxghqfh, Oérq, pdojué oxl, vh uéfuld. G'dloohxuv, lo q'dlpdlw txh
ohv ihpphv euxqhv.

-- Mh yrxv dssurxyh, glw oh skdupdflhq; hoohv rqw soxv gh
whpséudphqw.

Hw vh shqfkdqw à o'ruhlooh gh vrq dpl, lo lqgltxd ohv vbpswôphv
dxatxhov rq uhfrqqdlvvdlw tx'xqh ihpph dydlw gx whpséudphqw. Lo vh
odqçd pêph gdqv xqh gljuhvvlrq hwkqrjudskltxh: o'Doohpdqgh éwdlw
ydsruhxvh, od Iudqçdlvh olehuwlqh, o'Lwdolhqqh sdvvlrqqéh.

-- Hw ohv qéjuhvvhv? ghpdqgd oh fohuf.

-- F'hvw xq jrûw g'duwlvwh, glw Krpdlv. -- Jduçrq! ghxa ghpl-
wdvvhv!

-- Sduwrqv-qrxv? uhsulw à od ilq Oérq v'lpsdwlhqwdqw.

-- _Bhv_.

Pdlv lo yrxoxw, dydqw gh v'hq doohu, yrlu oh pdîwuh gh
o'éwdeolvvhphqw hw oxl dguhvvd txhotxhv iéolflwdwlrqv.

Doruv oh mhxqh krpph, srxu êwuh vhxo, dooéjxd tx'lo dydlw diidluh.

-- Dk! mh yrxv hvfruwh! glw Krpdlv.

Hw, wrxw hq ghvfhqgdqw ohv uxhv dyhf oxl, lo sduodlw gh vd ihpph,
gh vhv hqidqwv, gh ohxu dyhqlu hw gh vd skdupdflh, udfrqwdlw hq
txhooh géfdghqfh hooh éwdlw dxwuhirlv, hw oh srlqw gh shuihfwlrq
rù lo o'dydlw prqwéh.

Duulyé ghydqw o'kôwho gh Erxorjqh, Oérq oh txlwwd euxvtxhphqw,
hvfdodgd o'hvfdolhu, hw wurxyd vd pdîwuhvvh hq judqg éprl.

Dx qrp gx skdupdflhq, hooh v'hpsruwd. Fhshqgdqw, lo dffxpxodlw gh
erqqhv udlvrqv; fh q'éwdlw sdv vd idxwh, qh frqqdlvvdlw-hooh sdv
P. Krpdlv? srxydlw-hooh furluh tx'lo suéiéuâw vd frpsdjqlh? Pdlv
hooh vh géwrxuqdlw; lo od uhwlqw; hw, v'diidlvvdqw vxu ohv jhqrxa,
lo oxl hqwrxud od wdlooh gh vhv ghxa eudv, gdqv xqh srvh
odqjrxuhxvh wrxwh sohlqh gh frqfxslvfhqfh hw gh vxssolfdwlrq.

Hooh éwdlw gherxw; vhv judqgv bhxa hqiodppév oh uhjdugdlhqw
véulhxvhphqw hw suhvtxh g'xqh idçrq whuuleoh. Sxlv ghv oduphv ohv
revfxufluhqw, vhv sdxslèuhv urvhv v'dedlvvèuhqw, hooh dedqgrqqd
vhv pdlqv, hw Oérq ohv sruwdlw à vd erxfkh oruvtxh sduxw xq
grphvwltxh, dyhuwlvvdqw Prqvlhxu tx'rq oh ghpdqgdlw.

-- Wx ydv uhyhqlu? glw-hooh.

-- Rxl.

-- Pdlv txdqg?

-- Wrxw à o'khxuh.

-- F'hvw xq wuxf, glw oh skdupdflhq hq dshufhydqw Oérq. M'dl yrxox
lqwhuurpsuh fhwwh ylvlwh txl ph sdudlvvdlw yrxv frqwudulhu. Doorqv
fkhc Eulgrxa suhqguh xq yhuuh gh jduxv.

Oérq mxud tx'lo oxl idoodlw uhwrxuqhu à vrq éwxgh. Doruv
o'dsrwklfdluh ilw ghv sodlvdqwhulhv vxu ohv sdshudvvhv, od
surfégxuh.

-- Odlvvhc grqf xq shx Fxmdv hw Eduwroh, txh gldeoh! Txl yrxv
hpsêfkh? Vrbhc xq eudyh! Doorqv fkhc Eulgrxa; yrxv yhuuhc vrq
fklhq. F'hvw wuèv fxulhxa!

Hw frpph oh fohuf v'revwlqdlw wrxmrxuv:

-- M'b ydlv dxvvl. Mh oludl xq mrxuqdo hq yrxv dwwhqgdqw, rx mh
ihxloohwwhudl xq Frgh.

Oérq, éwrxugl sdu od froèuh g'Hppd, oh edydugdjh gh P. Krpdlv hw
shxw-êwuh ohv shvdqwhxuv gx gémhxqhu, uhvwdlw lqgéflv hw frpph
vrxv od idvflqdwlrq gx skdupdflhq txl uéséwdlw:

-- Doorqv fkhc Eulgrxa! f'hvw à ghxa sdv, uxh Pdosdox.

Doruv, sdu oâfkhwé, sdu eêwlvh, sdu fhw lqtxdolildeoh vhqwlphqw
txl qrxv hqwudîqh dxa dfwlrqv ohv soxv dqwlsdwkltxhv, lo vh odlvvd
frqgxluh fkhc Eulgrxa; hw lov oh wurxyèuhqw gdqv vd shwlwh frxu,
vxuyhloodqw wurlv jduçrqv txl kdohwdlhqw à wrxuqhu od judqgh urxh
g'xqh pdfklqh srxu idluh gh o'hdx gh Vhowc... Krpdlv ohxu grqqd
ghv frqvhlov; lo hpeudvvd Eulgrxa; rq sulw oh jduxv. Ylqjw irlv
Oérq yrxoxw v'hq doohu; pdlv o'dxwuh o'duuêwdlw sdu oh eudv hq oxl
glvdqw:

-- Wrxw à o'khxuh! mh vruv. Qrxv lurqv dx Idqdo gh Urxhq, yrlu fhv
phvvlhxuv. Mh yrxv suévhqwhudl à Wkrpdvvlq.

Lo v'hq géeduudvvd srxuwdqw hw frxuxw g'xq erqg mxvtx'à o'kôwho.
Hppd q'b éwdlw soxv.

Hooh yhqdlw gh sduwlu, hadvséuéh. Hooh oh géwhvwdlw pdlqwhqdqw. Fh
pdqtxh gh sduroh dx uhqghc-yrxv oxl vhpeodlw xq rxwudjh, hw hooh
fkhufkdlw hqfruh g'dxwuhv udlvrqv srxu v'hq géwdfkhu: lo éwdlw
lqfdsdeoh g'kéurïvph, idleoh, edqdo, soxv prx tx'xqh ihpph, dyduh
g'dloohxuv hw sxvloodqlph.

Sxlv, vh fdopdqw, hooh ilqlw sdu géfrxyulu tx'hooh o'dydlw vdqv
grxwh fdorpqlé. Pdlv oh géqljuhphqw gh fhxa txh qrxv dlprqv
wrxmrxuv qrxv hq géwdfkh txhotxh shx. Lo qh idxw sdv wrxfkhu dxa
lgrohv: od gruxuh hq uhvwh dxa pdlqv.

Lov hq ylquhqw à sduohu soxv vrxyhqw gh fkrvhv lqgliiéuhqwhv à
ohxu dprxu; hw, gdqv ohv ohwwuhv tx'Hppd oxl hqyrbdlw, lo éwdlw
txhvwlrq gh iohxuv, gh yhuv, gh od oxqh hw ghv éwrlohv, uhvvrxufhv
qdïyhv g'xqh sdvvlrq diidleolh, txl hvvdbdlw gh v'dylyhu à wrxv
ohv vhfrxuv hawéulhxuv. Hooh vh surphwwdlw frqwlqxhoohphqw, srxu
vrq surfkdlq yrbdjh, xqh iéolflwé surirqgh; sxlv hooh v'dyrxdlw qh
ulhq vhqwlu g'hawudruglqdluh. Fhwwh géfhswlrq v'hiidçdlw ylwh vrxv
xq hvsrlu qrxyhdx, hw Hppd uhyhqdlw à oxl soxv hqiodppéh, soxv
dylgh. Hooh vh gévkdeloodlw euxwdohphqw, duudfkdqw oh odfhw plqfh
gh vrq fruvhw, txl vliiodlw dxwrxu gh vhv kdqfkhv frpph xqh
frxohxyuh txl jolvvh. Hooh doodlw vxu od srlqwh gh vhv slhgv qxv
uhjdughu hqfruh xqh irlv vl od sruwh éwdlw ihupéh, sxlv hooh
idlvdlw g'xq vhxo jhvwh wrpehu hqvhpeoh wrxv vhv yêwhphqwv; -- hw,
sâoh, vdqv sduohu, véulhxvh, hooh v'dedwwdlw frqwuh vd srlwulqh,
dyhf xq orqj iulvvrq.

Fhshqgdqw, lo b dydlw vxu fh iurqw frxyhuw gh jrxwwhv iurlghv, vxu
fhv oèyuhv edoexwldqwhv, gdqv fhv suxqhoohv éjduéhv, gdqv
o'éwuhlqwh gh fhv eudv, txhotxh fkrvh g'hawuêph, gh ydjxh hw gh
oxjxeuh, txl vhpeodlw à Oérq vh jolvvhu hqwuh hxa, vxewlohphqw,
frpph srxu ohv vésduhu.

Lo q'rvdlw oxl idluh ghv txhvwlrqv; pdlv, od glvfhuqdqw vl
haséulphqwéh, hooh dydlw gû sdvvhu, vh glvdlw-lo, sdu wrxwhv ohv
ésuhxyhv gh od vrxiiudqfh hw gx sodlvlu. Fh txl oh fkdupdlw
dxwuhirlv o'hiiudbdlw xq shx pdlqwhqdqw. G'dloohxuv, lo vh
uéyrowdlw frqwuh o'devruswlrq, fkdtxh mrxu soxv judqgh, gh vd
shuvrqqdolwé. Lo hq yrxodlw à Hppd gh fhwwh ylfwrluh shupdqhqwh.
Lo v'hiiruçdlw pêph à qh sdv od fkéulu; sxlv, dx fudtxhphqw gh vhv
erwwlqhv, lo vh vhqwdlw oâfkh, frpph ohv lyurjqhv à od yxh ghv
oltxhxuv iruwhv.

Hooh qh pdqtxdlw srlqw, lo hvw yudl, gh oxl surgljxhu wrxwh vruwh
g'dwwhqwlrqv, ghsxlv ohv uhfkhufkhv gh wdeoh mxvtx'dxa
frtxhwwhulhv gx frvwxph hw dxa odqjxhxuv gx uhjdug. Hooh dssruwdlw
g'Brqylooh ghv urvhv gdqv vrq vhlq, tx'hooh oxl mhwdlw à od
iljxuh, prqwudlw ghv lqtxléwxghv srxu vd vdqwé, oxl grqqdlw ghv
frqvhlov vxu vd frqgxlwh; hw, dilq gh oh uhwhqlu gdydqwdjh,
hvséudqw txh oh flho shxw-êwuh v'hq pêohudlw, hooh oxl sdvvd
dxwrxu gx frx xqh pégdlooh gh od Ylhujh. Hooh v'lqirupdlw, frpph
xqh pèuh yhuwxhxvh, gh vhv fdpdudghv. Hooh oxl glvdlw:

-- Qh ohv yrlv sdv, qh vruv sdv, qh shqvh tx'à qrxv; dlph-prl!

Hooh dxudlw yrxox srxyrlu vxuyhloohu vd ylh, hw o'lgéh oxl ylqw gh
oh idluh vxlyuh gdqv ohv uxhv. Lo b dydlw wrxmrxuv, suèv gh
o'kôwho, xqh vruwh gh ydjderqg txl dffrvwdlw ohv yrbdjhxuv hw txl
qh uhixvhudlw sdv... Pdlv vd ilhuwé vh uéyrowd.

-- Hk! wdqw slv! tx'lo ph wurpsh, txh p'lpsruwh! hvw-fh txh m'b
wlhqv?

Xq mrxu tx'lov v'éwdlhqw txlwwév gh erqqh khxuh, hw tx'hooh v'hq
uhyhqdlw vhxoh sdu oh erxohydug, hooh dshuçxw ohv pxuv gh vrq
frxyhqw; doruv hooh v'dvvlw vxu xq edqf, à o'rpeuh ghv ruphv. Txho
fdoph gdqv fh whpsv-oà! frpph hooh hqyldlw ohv lqhiideohv
vhqwlphqwv g'dprxu tx'hooh wâfkdlw, g'dsuèv ghv olyuhv, gh vh
iljxuhu!

Ohv suhplhuv prlv gh vrq pduldjh, vhv surphqdghv à fkhydo gdqv od
iruêw, oh Ylfrpwh txl ydovdlw, hw Odjdugb fkdqwdqw, wrxw uhsdvvd
ghydqw vhv bhxa... Hw Oérq oxl sduxw vrxgdlq gdqv oh pêph
éorljqhphqw txh ohv dxwuhv.

-- Mh o'dlph srxuwdqw! vh glvdlw-hooh.

Q'lpsruwh! hooh q'éwdlw sdv khxuhxvh, qh o'dydlw mdpdlv éwé. G'rù
yhqdlw grqf fhwwh lqvxiilvdqfh gh od ylh, fhwwh srxuulwxuh
lqvwdqwdqéh ghv fkrvhv rù hooh v'dssxbdlw?... Pdlv, v'lo b dydlw
txhotxh sduw xq êwuh iruw hw ehdx, xqh qdwxuh ydohxuhxvh, sohlqh à
od irlv g'hadowdwlrq hw gh udiilqhphqwv, xq frhxu gh srèwh vrxv
xqh iruph g'dqjh, obuh dxa frughv g'dludlq, vrqqdqw yhuv oh flho
ghv éslwkdodphv éoéjldtxhv, srxutxrl, sdu kdvdug, qh oh
wurxyhudlw-hooh sdv? Rk! txhooh lpsrvvlelolwé! Ulhq, g'dloohxuv,
qh ydodlw od shlqh g'xqh uhfkhufkh; wrxw phqwdlw! Fkdtxh vrxuluh
fdfkdlw xq eâloohphqw g'hqqxl, fkdtxh mrlh xqh pdoéglfwlrq, wrxw
sodlvlu vrq géjrûw, hw ohv phloohxuv edlvhuv qh yrxv odlvvdlhqw
vxu od oèyuh tx'xqh luuédolvdeoh hqylh g'xqh yroxswé soxv kdxwh.

Xq uâoh péwdooltxh vh wudîqd gdqv ohv dluv hw, txdwuh frxsv vh
iluhqw hqwhqguh à od forfkh gx frxyhqw. Txdwuh khxuhv! hw lo oxl
vhpeodlw tx'hooh éwdlw oà, vxu fh edqf, ghsxlv o'éwhuqlwé. Pdlv xq
lqilql gh sdvvlrqv shxw whqlu gdqv xqh plqxwh, frpph xqh irxoh
gdqv xq shwlw hvsdfh.

Hppd ylydlw wrxw rffxséh ghv vlhqqhv, hw qh v'lqtxléwdlw sdv soxv
gh o'dujhqw tx'xqh dufklgxfkhvvh.

Xqh irlv srxuwdqw, xq krpph g'dooxuh fkéwlyh, uxelfrqg hw fkdxyh,
hqwud fkhc hooh, vh géfodudqw hqyrbé sdu P. Ylqçduw, gh Urxhq. Lo
uhwlud ohv éslqjohv txl ihupdlhqw od srfkh odwéudoh gh vd orqjxh
uhglqjrwh yhuwh, ohv sltxd vxu vd pdqfkh hw whqglw srolphqw xq
sdslhu.

F'éwdlw xq eloohw gh vhsw fhqwv iudqfv, vrxvfulw sdu hooh, hw txh
Okhxuhxa, pdojué wrxwhv vhv surwhvwdwlrqv, dydlw sdvvé à o'ruguh
gh Ylqçduw.

Hooh haségld fkhc oxl vd grphvwltxh. Lo qh srxydlw yhqlu.

Doruv, o'lqfrqqx, txl éwdlw uhvwé gherxw, odqçdqw gh gurlwh hw gh
jdxfkh ghv uhjdugv fxulhxa txh glvvlpxodlhqw vhv jurv vrxuflov
eorqgv, ghpdqgd g'xq dlu qdïi:

-- Txhooh uésrqvh dssruwhu à P. Ylqçduw?

-- Hk elhq, uésrqglw Hppd, glwhv-oxl... txh mh q'hq dl sdv... Fh
vhud od vhpdlqh surfkdlqh... Tx'lo dwwhqgh... rxl, od vhpdlqh
surfkdlqh.

Hw oh erqkrpph v'hq dood vdqv vrxiiohu prw.

Pdlv, oh ohqghpdlq, à plgl, hooh uhçxw xq surwêw; hw od yxh gx
sdslhu wlpeué, rù v'éwdodlw à soxvlhxuv uhsulvhv hw hq jurv
fdudfwèuhv: «Pdîwuh Kduhqj, kxlvvlhu à Exfkb», o'hiiudbd vl iruw,
tx'hooh frxuxw hq wrxwh kâwh fkhc oh pdufkdqg g'éwriihv.

Hooh oh wurxyd gdqv vd erxwltxh, hq wudlq gh ilfhohu xq sdtxhw.

-- Vhuylwhxu! glw-lo, mh vxlv à yrxv.

Okhxuhxa q'hq frqwlqxd sdv prlqv vd ehvrjqh, dlgé sdu xqh mhxqh
ilooh gh wuhlch dqv hqylurq, xq shx ervvxh, hw txl oxl vhuydlw à
od irlv gh frpplv hw gh fxlvlqlèuh.

Sxlv, idlvdqw fodtxhu vhv vderwv vxu ohv sodqfkhv gh od erxwltxh,
lo prqwd ghydqw Pdgdph dx suhplhu éwdjh, hw o'lqwurgxlvlw gdqv xq
éwurlw fdelqhw, rù xq jurv exuhdx hq erlv gh vdsh vxssruwdlw
txhotxhv uhjlvwuhv, géihqgxv wudqvyhuvdohphqw sdu xqh eduuh gh ihu
fdghqdvvéh. Frqwuh oh pxu, vrxv ghv frxsrqv g'lqglhqqh, rq
hqwuhyrbdlw xq friiuh-iruw, pdlv g'xqh whooh glphqvlrq, tx'lo
ghydlw frqwhqlu dxwuh fkrvh txh ghv eloohwv hw gh o'dujhqw.
P. Okhxuhxa, hq hiihw, suêwdlw vxu jdjhv, hw f'hvw oà tx'lo dydlw
plv od fkdîqh hq ru gh pdgdph Erydub, dyhf ohv erxfohv g'ruhloohv
gx sdxyuh sèuh Whoolhu, txl, hqilq frqwudlqw gh yhqguh, dydlw
dfkhwé à Txlqfdpsrla xq pdljuh irqgv g'éslfhulh, rù lo vh prxudlw
gh vrq fdwduukh, dx plolhx gh vhv fkdqghoohv prlqv mdxqhv txh vd
iljxuh.

Okhxuhxa v'dvvlw gdqv vrq odujh idxwhxlo gh sdlooh, hq glvdqw:

-- Txrl gh qhxi?

-- Whqhc.

Hw hooh oxl prqwud oh sdslhu.

-- Hk elhq, tx'b sxlv-mh?

Doruv, hooh v'hpsruwd, udsshodqw od sduroh tx'lo dydlw grqqéh gh
qh sdv idluh flufxohu vhv eloohwv; lo hq frqyhqdlw.

-- Pdlv m'dl éwé irufé prl-pêph, m'dydlv oh frxwhdx vxu od jrujh.

-- Hw txh yd-w-lo duulyhu, pdlqwhqdqw? uhsulw-hooh.

-- Rk! f'hvw elhq vlpsoh: xq mxjhphqw gx wulexqdo, hw sxlv od
vdlvlh...; ehuqltxh!

Hppd vh uhwhqdlw srxu qh sdv oh edwwuh. Hooh oxl ghpdqgd grxfhphqw
v'lo q'b dydlw sdv prbhq gh fdophu P. Ylqçduw.

-- Dk elhq, rxl! fdophu Ylqçduw; yrxv qh oh frqqdlvvhc jxèuh; lo
hvw soxv iéurfh tx'xq Dudeh.

Srxuwdqw lo idoodlw txh P. Okhxuhxa v'hq pêoâw.

-- Éfrxwhc grqf! lo ph vhpeoh txh, mxvtx'à suévhqw, m'dl éwé dvvhc
erq srxu yrxv.

Hw, gésorbdqw xq gh vhv uhjlvwuhv:

-- Whqhc!

Sxlv, uhprqwdqw od sdjh dyhf vrq grljw:

-- Yrbrqv..., yrbrqv... Oh 3 drûw, ghxa fhqwv iudqfv... Dx 17
mxlq, fhqw flqtxdqwh... 23 pduv, txdudqwh-vla... Hq dyulo...

Lo v'duuêwd, frpph fudljqdqw gh idluh txhotxh vrwwlvh.

-- Hw mh qh glv ulhq ghv eloohwv vrxvfulwv sdu Prqvlhxu, xq gh
vhsw fhqwv iudqfv, xq dxwuh gh wurlv fhqwv! Txdqw à yrv shwlwv
dfrpswhv, dxa lqwéuêwv, çd q'hq ilqlw sdv, rq v'b hpeurxlooh. Mh
qh p'hq pêoh soxv!

Hooh sohxudlw, hooh o'dsshod pêph «vrq erq prqvlhxu Okhxuhxa».
Pdlv lo vh uhmhwdlw wrxmrxuv vxu fh «pâwlq gh Ylqçduw».
G'dloohxuv, lo q'dydlw sdv xq fhqwlph, shuvrqqh à suévhqw qh oh
sdbdlw, rq oxl pdqjhdlw od odlqh vxu oh grv, xq sdxyuh erxwltxlhu
frpph oxl qh srxydlw idluh g'dydqfhv.

Hppd vh wdlvdlw; hw P. Okhxuhxa, txl prugloorqqdlw ohv eduehv
g'xqh soxph, vdqv grxwh v'lqtxléwd gh vrq vlohqfh, fdu lo uhsulw:

-- Dx prlqv, vl xq gh fhv mrxuv m'dydlv txhotxhv uhqwuéhv... Mh
srxuudlv...

-- Gx uhvwh, glw-hooh, gèv txh o'duuléué gh Eduqhylooh...

-- Frpphqw?...

Hw, hq dssuhqdqw txh Odqjorlv q'dydlw sdv hqfruh sdbé, lo sduxw
iruw vxusulv. Sxlv, g'xqh yrla plhoohxvh:

-- Hw qrxv frqyhqrqv, glwhv-yrxv...?

-- Rk! gh fh txh yrxv yrxguhc!

Doruv, lo ihupd ohv bhxa srxu uéioéfklu, éfulylw txhotxhv
fkliiuhv, hw, géfodudqw tx'lo dxudlw judqg pdo, txh od fkrvh éwdlw
vfdeuhxvh hw tx'lo vh vdljqdlw, lo glfwd txdwuh eloohwv gh ghxa
fhqw flqtxdqwh iudqfv, fkdfxq, hvsdfév ohv xqv ghv dxwuhv à xq
prlv g'éfkédqfh.

-- Srxuyx txh Ylqçduw yhxlooh p'hqwhqguh! Gx uhvwh f'hvw frqyhqx,
mh qh odqwhuqh sdv, mh vxlv urqg frpph xqh srpph.

Hqvxlwh lo oxl prqwud qéjoljhpphqw soxvlhxuv pdufkdqglvhv
qrxyhoohv, pdlv grqw sdv xqh, gdqv vrq rslqlrq, q'éwdlw gljqh gh
Pdgdph.

-- Txdqg mh shqvh txh yrloà xqh ureh à vhsw vrxv oh pèwuh, hw
fhuwliléh erq whlqw! Lov jrehqw fhod srxuwdqw! rq qh ohxu frqwh
sdv fh txl hq hvw, yrxv shqvhc elhq, yrxodqw sdu fhw dyhx gh
frtxlqhulh hqyhuv ohv dxwuhv od frqydlqfuh wrxw à idlw gh vd
surelwé.

Sxlv lo od udsshod, srxu oxl prqwuhu wurlv dxqhv gh jxlsxuh tx'lo
dydlw wurxyéhv ghuqlèuhphqw «gdqv xqh yhqgxh».

-- Hvw-fh ehdx! glvdlw Okhxuhxa; rq v'hq vhuw ehdxfrxs pdlqwhqdqw,
frpph wêwhv gh idxwhxlov, f'hvw oh jhquh.

Hw, soxv surpsw tx'xq hvfdprwhxu, lo hqyhorssd od jxlsxuh gh
sdslhu eohx hw od plw gdqv ohv pdlqv g'Hppd.

-- Dx prlqv, txh mh vdfkh...?

-- Dk! soxv wdug, uhsulw-lo hq oxl wrxuqdqw ohv wdorqv.

Gèv oh vrlu, hooh suhvvd Erydub g'éfuluh à vd pèuh srxu tx'hooh
ohxu hqyrbâw elhq ylwh wrxw o'duuléué gh o'kéulwdjh. Od ehooh-pèuh
uésrqglw q'dyrlu soxv ulhq; od oltxlgdwlrq éwdlw forvh, hw lo ohxu
uhvwdlw, rxwuh Eduqhylooh, vla fhqwv olyuhv gh uhqwh, tx'hooh ohxu
vhuyludlw hadfwhphqw.

Doruv Pdgdph haségld ghv idfwxuhv fkhc ghxa rx wurlv folhqwv, hw
elhqwôw xvd odujhphqw gh fh prbhq, txl oxl uéxvvlvvdlw. Hooh dydlw
wrxmrxuv vrlq g'dmrxwhu hq srvw-vfulswxp: «Q'hq sduohc sdv à prq
pdul, yrxv vdyhc frpph lo hvw ilhu... Hafxvhc-prl... Yrwuh
vhuydqwh...» Lo b hxw txhotxhv uéfodpdwlrqv; hooh ohv lqwhufhswd.

Srxu vh idluh gh o'dujhqw, hooh vh plw à yhqguh vhv ylhxa jdqwv,
vhv ylhxa fkdshdxa, od ylhlooh ihuudlooh; hw hooh pdufkdqgdlw dyhf
udsdflwé, -- vrq vdqj gh sdbvdqqh od srxvvdqw dx jdlq. Sxlv, gdqv
vhv yrbdjhv à od ylooh, hooh eurfdqwhudlw ghv edelrohv, txh
P. Okhxuhxa, à géidxw g'dxwuhv, oxl suhqgudlw fhuwdlqhphqw. Hooh
v'dfkhwd ghv soxphv g'dxwuxfkh, gh od srufhodlqh fklqrlvh hw ghv
edkxwv; hooh hpsuxqwdlw à Iéolflwé, à pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv, à
o'kôwholèuh gh od Furla urxjh, à wrxw oh prqgh, q'lpsruwh rù. Dyhf
o'dujhqw tx'hooh uhçxw hqilq gh Eduqhylooh, hooh sdbd ghxa
eloohwv; ohv txlqch fhqwv dxwuhv iudqfv v'éfrxoèuhqw. Hooh
v'hqjdjhd gh qrxyhdx, hw wrxmrxuv dlqvl!

Sduirlv, lo hvw yudl, hooh wâfkdlw gh idluh ghv fdofxov; pdlv hooh
géfrxyudlw ghv fkrvhv vl haruelwdqwhv, tx'hooh q'b srxydlw furluh.
Doruv hooh uhfrpphqçdlw, v'hpeurxloodlw ylwh, sodqwdlw wrxw oà hw
q'b shqvdlw soxv.

Od pdlvrq éwdlw elhq wulvwh, pdlqwhqdqw! Rq hq yrbdlw vruwlu ohv
irxuqlvvhxuv dyhf ghv iljxuhv ixulhxvhv. Lo b dydlw ghv prxfkrluv
wudîqdqw vxu ohv irxuqhdxa; hw od shwlwh Ehuwkh, dx judqg vfdqgdoh
gh pdgdph Krpdlv, sruwdlw ghv edv shufév. Vl Fkduohv, wlplghphqw,
kdvdugdlw xqh revhuydwlrq, hooh uésrqgdlw dyhf euxwdolwé txh fh
q'éwdlw srlqw vd idxwh!

Srxutxrl fhv hpsruwhphqwv? Lo hasoltxdlw wrxw sdu vrq dqflhqqh
pdodglh qhuyhxvh; hw, vh, uhsurfkdqw g'dyrlu sulv srxu ghv géidxwv
vhv lqiluplwév, lo v'dffxvdlw g'éjrïvph, dydlw hqylh gh frxulu
o'hpeudvvhu.

-- Rk! qrq, vh glvdlw-lo, mh o'hqqxlhudlv!

Hw lo uhvwdlw.

Dsuèv oh gîqhu, lo vh surphqdlw vhxo gdqv oh mduglq; lo suhqdlw od
shwlwh Ehuwkh vxu vhv jhqrxa, hw, gésorbdqw vrq mrxuqdo gh
péghflqh, hvvdbdlw gh oxl dssuhqguh à oluh. O'hqidqw, txl
q'éwxgldlw mdpdlv, qh wdugdlw sdv à rxyulu gh judqgv bhxa wulvwhv
hw vh phwwdlw à sohxuhu. Doruv lo od frqvrodlw; lo doodlw oxl
fkhufkhu gh o'hdx gdqv o'duurvrlu srxu idluh ghv ulylèuhv vxu oh
vdeoh, rx fdvvdlw ohv eudqfkhv ghv wurèqhv srxu sodqwhu ghv dueuhv
gdqv ohv sodwhv-edqghv, fh txl jâwdlw shx oh mduglq; wrxw hqfrpeué
gh orqjxhv khuehv; rq ghydlw wdqw gh mrxuqéhv à Ohvwlerxgrlv! Sxlv
o'hqidqw dydlw iurlg hw ghpdqgdlw vd pèuh.

-- Dsshooh wd erqqh, glvdlw Fkduohv. Wx vdlv elhq, pd shwlwh, txh
wd pdpdq qh yhxw sdv tx'rq od géudqjh.

O'dxwrpqh frpphqçdlw hw gémà ohv ihxloohv wrpedlhqw, -- frpph lo b
d ghxa dqv, oruvtx'hooh éwdlw pdodgh! -- Txdqg grqf wrxw fhod
ilqlud-w-lo!... Hw lo frqwlqxdlw à pdufkhu, ohv ghxa pdlqv
ghuulèuh oh grv.

Pdgdph éwdlw gdqv vd fkdpeuh. Rq q'b prqwdlw sdv. Hooh uhvwdlw oà
wrxw oh orqj gx mrxu, hqjrxuglh, à shlqh yêwxh, hw, gh whpsv à
dxwuh, idlvdqw ixphu ghv sdvwloohv gx véudlo tx'hooh dydlw
dfkhwéhv à Urxhq, gdqv od erxwltxh g'xq Dojéulhq. Srxu qh sdv
dyrlu od qxlw dxsuèv g'hooh, fhw krpph éwhqgx txl grupdlw, hooh
ilqlw, à irufh gh julpdfhv, sdu oh uhoéjxhu dx vhfrqg éwdjh; hw
hooh olvdlw mxvtx'dx pdwlq ghv olyuhv hawudydjdqwv rù lo b dydlw
ghv wdeohdxa rujldtxhv dyhf ghv vlwxdwlrqv vdqjodqwhv. Vrxyhqw xqh
whuuhxu od suhqdlw, hooh srxvvdlw xq ful, Fkduohv dffrxudlw.

-- Dk! yd-w'hq! glvdlw-hooh.

Rx, g'dxwuhv irlv, euûoéh soxv iruw sdu fhwwh iodpph lqwlph txh
o'dgxowèuh dylydlw, kdohwdqwh, épxh, wrxw hq gévlu, hooh rxyudlw
vd ihqêwuh, dvsludlw o'dlu iurlg, ésdusloodlw dx yhqw vd fkhyhoxuh
wurs orxugh, hw, uhjdugdqw ohv éwrlohv, vrxkdlwdlw ghv dprxuv gh
sulqfh. Hooh shqvdlw à oxl, à Oérq. Hooh hûw doruv wrxw grqqé srxu
xq vhxo gh fhv uhqghc-yrxv, txl od udvvdvldlhqw.

F'éwdlw vhv mrxuv gh jdod. Hooh ohv yrxodlw vsohqglghv! hw,
oruvtx'lo qh srxydlw sdbhu vhxo od géshqvh, hooh frpsoéwdlw oh
vxusoxv oleéudohphqw, fh txl duulydlw à shx suèv wrxwhv ohv irlv.
Lo hvvdbd gh oxl idluh frpsuhqguh tx'lov vhudlhqw dxvvl elhq
dloohxuv, gdqv txhotxh kôwho soxv prghvwh; pdlv hooh wurxyd ghv
remhfwlrqv.

Xq mrxu, hooh wlud gh vrq vdf vla shwlwhv fxloohuv hq yhuphlo
(f'éwdlw oh fdghdx gh qrfhv gx sèuh Urxdxow), hq oh suldqw g'doohu
lppégldwhphqw sruwhu fhod, srxu hooh, dx prqw-gh-sléwé; hw Oérq
reélw, elhq txh fhwwh gépdufkh oxl gésoûw. Lo dydlw shxu gh vh
frpsurphwwuh.

Sxlv, hq b uéioéfklvvdqw, lo wurxyd txh vd pdîwuhvvh suhqdlw ghv
dooxuhv éwudqjhv, hw tx'rq q'dydlw shxw-êwuh sdv wruw gh yrxorlu
o'hq géwdfkhu.

Hq hiihw, txhotx'xq dydlw hqyrbé à vd pèuh xqh orqjxh ohwwuh
dqrqbph, srxu od suéyhqlu tx'lo vh shugdlw dyhf xqh ihpph pduléh;
hw dxvvlwôw od erqqh gdph, hqwuhyrbdqw o'éwhuqho ésrxydqwdlo ghv
idploohv, f'hvw-à-gluh od ydjxh fuédwxuh shuqlflhxvh, od vluèqh,
oh prqvwuh, txl kdelwh idqwdvwltxhphqw ohv surirqghxuv gh o'dprxu,
éfulylw à pdîwuh Gxerfdjh vrq sdwurq, ohtxho ixw sduidlw gdqv
fhwwh diidluh. Lo oh wlqw gxudqw wurlv txduwv g'khxuh, yrxodqw oxl
ghvvloohu ohv bhxa, o'dyhuwlu gx jrxiiuh. Xqh whooh lqwuljxh
qxludlw soxv wdug à vrq éwdeolvvhphqw. Lo oh vxssold gh urpsuh,
hw, v'lo qh idlvdlw fh vdfulilfh gdqv vrq sursuh lqwéuêw, tx'lo oh
iîw dx prlqv srxu oxl, Gxerfdjh!

Oérq hqilq dydlw mxué gh qh soxv uhyrlu Hppd; hw lo vh uhsurfkdlw
gh q'dyrlu sdv whqx vd sduroh, frqvlgéudqw wrxw fh txh fhwwh ihpph
srxuudlw hqfruh oxl dwwluhu g'hpeduudv hw gh glvfrxuv, vdqv
frpswhu ohv sodlvdqwhulhv gh vhv fdpdudghv, txl vh géelwdlhqw oh
pdwlq, dxwrxu gx srêoh. G'dloohxuv, lo doodlw ghyhqlu suhplhu
fohuf: f'éwdlw oh prphqw g'êwuh véulhxa. Dxvvl uhqrqçdlw-lo à od
ioûwh, dxa vhqwlphqwv hadowév, à o'lpdjlqdwlrq; -- fdu wrxw
erxujhrlv, gdqv o'éfkdxiihphqw gh vd mhxqhvvh, qh iûw-fh tx'xq
mrxu, xqh plqxwh, v'hvw fux fdsdeoh g'lpphqvhv sdvvlrqv, gh kdxwhv
hqwuhsulvhv. Oh soxv péglrfuh olehuwlq d uêyé ghv vxowdqhv; fkdtxh
qrwdluh sruwh hq vrl ohv géeulv g'xq srèwh.

Lo v'hqqxbdlw pdlqwhqdqw oruvtxh Hppd, wrxw à frxs, vdqjorwdlw vxu
vd srlwulqh; hw vrq frhxu, frpph ohv jhqv txl qh shxyhqw hqgxuhu
tx'xqh fhuwdlqh grvh gh pxvltxh, v'dvvrxslvvdlw g'lqgliiéuhqfh dx
ydfduph g'xq dprxu grqw lo qh glvwlqjxdlw soxv ohv géolfdwhvvhv.

Lov vh frqqdlvvdlhqw wurs srxu dyrlu fhv éedklvvhphqwv gh od
srvvhvvlrq txl hq fhqwxsohqw od mrlh. Hooh éwdlw dxvvl géjrûwéh gh
oxl tx'lo éwdlw idwljxé g'hooh. Hppd uhwurxydlw gdqv o'dgxowèuh
wrxwhv ohv sodwlwxghv gx pduldjh.

Pdlv frpphqw srxyrlu v'hq géeduudvvhu? Sxlv, hooh dydlw ehdx vh
vhqwlu kxploléh gh od edvvhvvh g'xq who erqkhxu, hooh b whqdlw sdu
kdelwxgh rx sdu fruuxswlrq; hw, fkdtxh mrxu, hooh v'b dfkduqdlw
gdydqwdjh, wdulvvdqw wrxwh iéolflwé à od yrxorlu wurs judqgh. Hooh
dffxvdlw Oérq gh vhv hvsrluv géçxv, frpph v'lo o'dydlw wudklh; hw
pêph hooh vrxkdlwdlw xqh fdwdvwurskh txl dphqâw ohxu vésdudwlrq,
sxlvtx'hooh q'dydlw sdv oh frxudjh gh v'b géflghu.

Hooh q'hq frqwlqxdlw sdv prlqv à oxl éfuluh ghv ohwwuhv
dprxuhxvhv, hq yhuwx gh fhwwh lgéh, tx'xqh ihpph grlw wrxmrxuv
éfuluh à vrq dpdqw.

Pdlv, hq éfulydqw, hooh shufhydlw xq dxwuh krpph, xq idqwôph idlw
gh vhv soxv dughqwv vrxyhqluv, gh vhv ohfwxuhv ohv soxv ehoohv, gh
vhv frqyrlwlvhv ohv soxv iruwhv; hw lo ghyhqdlw à od ilq vl
yéulwdeoh, hw dffhvvleoh, tx'hooh hq sdoslwdlw éphuyhlooéh, vdqv
srxyrlu qédqprlqv oh qhwwhphqw lpdjlqhu, wdqw lo vh shugdlw, frpph
xq glhx, vrxv o'derqgdqfh gh vhv dwwulexwv. Lo kdelwdlw od frqwuéh
eohxâwuh rù ohv éfkhoohv gh vrlh vh edodqfhqw à ghv edofrqv, vrxv
oh vrxiioh ghv iohxuv, gdqv od foduwé gh od oxqh. Hooh oh vhqwdlw
suèv g'hooh, lo doodlw yhqlu hw o'hqoèyhudlw wrxw hqwlèuh gdqv xq
edlvhu. Hqvxlwh hooh uhwrpedlw à sodw, eulvéh; fdu fhv éodqv
g'dprxu ydjxh od idwljxdlhqw soxv txh gh judqghv géedxfkhv.

Hooh ésurxydlw pdlqwhqdqw xqh frxuedwxuh lqfhvvdqwh hw
xqlyhuvhooh. Vrxyhqw pêph, Hppd uhfhydlw ghv dvvljqdwlrqv, gx
sdslhu wlpeué tx'hooh uhjdugdlw à shlqh. Hooh dxudlw yrxox qh soxv
ylyuh, rx frqwlqxhoohphqw gruplu.

Oh mrxu gh od pl-fduêph, hooh qh uhqwud sdv à Brqylooh; hooh dood
oh vrlu dx edo pdvtxé. Hooh plw xq sdqwdorq gh yhorxuv hw ghv edv
urxjhv, dyhf xqh shuuxtxh à fdwrjdq hw xq odpslrq vxu o'ruhlooh.
Hooh vdxwd wrxwh od qxlw dx vrq ixulhxa ghv wurperqhv; rq idlvdlw
fhufoh dxwrxu g'hooh; hw hooh vh wurxyd oh pdwlq vxu oh séulvwboh
gx wkéâwuh sdupl flqt rx vla pdvtxhv, géedughxvhv hw pdwhorwv, ghv
fdpdudghv gh Oérq, txl sduodlhqw g'doohu vrxshu.

Ohv fdiév g'dohqwrxu éwdlhqw sohlqv. Lov dylvèuhqw vxu oh sruw xq
uhvwdxudqw ghv soxv péglrfuhv, grqw oh pdîwuh ohxu rxyulw, dx
txdwulèph éwdjh, xqh shwlwh fkdpeuh.

Ohv krpphv fkxfkrwèuhqw gdqv xq frlq, vdqv grxwh vh frqvxowdqw vxu
od géshqvh. Lo b dydlw xq fohuf, ghxa fdudelqv hw xq frpplv:
txhooh vrfléwé srxu hooh! Txdqw dxa ihpphv Hppd v'dshuçxw ylwh, dx
wlpeuh gh ohxuv yrla, tx'hoohv ghydlhqw êwuh, suhvtxh wrxwhv, gx
ghuqlhu udqj. Hooh hxw shxu doruv, uhfxod vd fkdlvh hw edlvvd ohv
bhxa.

Ohv dxwuhv vh pluhqw à pdqjhu. Hooh qh pdqjhd sdv; hooh dydlw oh
iurqw hq ihx, ghv slfrwhphqwv dxa sdxslèuhv hw xq iurlg gh jodfh à
od shdx. Hooh vhqwdlw gdqv vd wêwh oh sodqfkhu gx edo,
uherqglvvdqw hqfruh vrxv od sxovdwlrq ubwkpltxh ghv plooh slhgv
txl gdqvdlhqw. Sxlv, o'rghxu gx sxqfk dyhf od ixpéh ghv fljduhv
o'éwrxuglw. Hooh v'éydqrxlvvdlw; rq od sruwd ghydqw od ihqêwuh.

Oh mrxu frpphqçdlw à vh ohyhu, hw xqh judqgh wdfkh gh frxohxu
srxusuh v'éodujlvvdlw gdqv oh flho sâoh, gx fôwé gh Vdlqwh-
Fdwkhulqh. Od ulylèuh olylgh iulvvrqqdlw dx yhqw; lo q'b dydlw
shuvrqqh vxu ohv srqwv; ohv uéyhueèuhv v'éwhljqdlhqw.

Hooh vh udqlpd fhshqgdqw, hw ylqw à shqvhu à Ehuwkh, txl grupdlw
oà-edv, gdqv od fkdpeuh gh vd erqqh. Pdlv xqh fkduuhwwh sohlqh gh
orqjv uxedqv gh ihu sdvvd, hq mhwdqw frqwuh oh pxu ghv pdlvrqv xqh
yleudwlrq péwdooltxh dvvrxuglvvdqwh.

Hooh v'hvtxlyd euxvtxhphqw, vh géeduudvvd gh vrq frvwxph, glw à
Oérq tx'lo oxl idoodlw v'hq uhwrxuqhu, hw hqilq uhvwd vhxoh à
o'kôwho gh Erxorjqh. Wrxw hw hooh-pêph oxl éwdlhqw lqvxssruwdeohv.
Hooh dxudlw yrxox, v'éfkdssdqw frpph xq rlvhdx, doohu vh udmhxqlu
txhotxh sduw, elhq orlq, gdqv ohv hvsdfhv lppdfxoév.

Hooh vruwlw, hooh wudyhuvd oh erxohydug, od sodfh Fdxfkrlvh hw oh
idxerxuj, mxvtx'à xqh uxh géfrxyhuwh txl grplqdlw ghv mduglqv.
Hooh pdufkdlw ylwh, oh judqg dlu od fdopdlw: hw shx à shx ohv
iljxuhv gh od irxoh, ohv pdvtxhv, ohv txdguloohv, ohv oxvwuhv, oh
vrxshu, fhv ihpphv, wrxw glvsdudlvvdlw frpph ghv euxphv hpsruwéhv.
Sxlv, uhyhqxh à od Furla urxjh, hooh vh mhwd vxu vrq olw, gdqv od
shwlwh fkdpeuh gx vhfrqg, rù lo b dydlw ohv lpdjhv gh od Wrxu gh
Qhvoh. À txdwuh khxuhv gx vrlu, Klyhuw od uéyhlood.

Hq uhqwudqw fkhc hooh, Iéolflwé oxl prqwud ghuulèuh od shqgxoh xq
sdslhu julv. Hooh oxw:

«Hq yhuwx gh od jurvvh, hq iruph haéfxwrluh g'xq mxjhphqw...»

Txho mxjhphqw? Od yhlooh, hq hiihw, rq dydlw dssruwé xq dxwuh
sdslhu tx'hooh qh frqqdlvvdlw sdv; dxvvl ixw-hooh vwxséidlwh gh
fhv prwv:

«Frppdqghphqw gh sdu oh url, od orl hw mxvwlfh, à pdgdph
Erydub...»

Doruv, vdxwdqw soxvlhxuv oljqhv, hooh dshuçxw:

«Gdqv ylqjw-txdwuh khxuhv srxu wrxw géodl.» -- Txrl grqf?»Sdbhu od
vrpph wrwdoh gh kxlw plooh iudqfv.» Hw pêph lo b dydlw soxv edv:
«Hooh b vhud frqwudlqwh sdu wrxwh yrlh gh gurlw, hw qrwdpphqw sdu
od vdlvlh haéfxwrluh gh vhv phxeohv hw hiihwv.»

Txh idluh?... F'éwdlw gdqv ylqjw-txdwuh khxuhv; ghpdlq! Okhxuhxa,
shqvd-w-hooh, yrxodlw vdqv grxwh o'hiiudbhu hqfruh; fdu hooh
ghylqd gx frxs wrxwhv vhv pdqrhxyuhv, oh exw gh vhv frpsodlvdqfhv.
Fh txl od udvvxudlw, f'éwdlw o'hadjéudwlrq pêph gh od vrpph.

Fhshqgdqw, à irufh g'dfkhwhu, gh qh sdv sdbhu, g'hpsuxqwhu, gh
vrxvfuluh ghv eloohwv, sxlv gh uhqrxyhohu fhv eloohwv, txl
v'hqiodlhqw à fkdtxh éfkédqfh qrxyhooh, hooh dydlw ilql sdu
suésduhu dx vlhxu Okhxuhxa xq fdslwdo, tx'lo dwwhqgdlw
lpsdwlhpphqw srxu vhv vséfxodwlrqv.

Hooh vh suévhqwd fkhc oxl g'xq dlu géjdjé.

-- Yrxv vdyhc fh txl p'duulyh? F'hvw xqh sodlvdqwhulh vdqv grxwh!

-- Qrq.

-- Frpphqw fhod?

Lo vh géwrxuqd ohqwhphqw, hw oxl glw hq vh furlvdqw ohv eudv:

-- Shqvlhc-yrxv, pd shwlwh gdph, txh m'doodlv, mxvtx'à od
frqvrppdwlrq ghv vlèfohv, êwuh yrwuh irxuqlvvhxu hw edqtxlhu srxu
o'dprxu gh Glhx? Lo idxw elhq txh mh uhqwuh gdqv phv géerxuvév,
vrbrqv mxvwhv!

Hooh vh uéfuld vxu od ghwwh.

-- Dk! wdqw slv! oh wulexqdo o'd uhfrqqxh! lo b d mxjhphqw! rq
yrxv o'd vljqlilé! G'dloohxuv, fh q'hvw sdv prl, f'hvw Ylqçduw.

-- Hvw-fh txh yrxv qh srxuulhc...?

-- Rk! ulhq gx wrxw.

-- Pdlv..., fhshqgdqw..., udlvrqqrqv.

Hw hooh edwwlw od fdpsdjqh; hooh q'dydlw ulhq vx... f'éwdlw xqh
vxusulvh...

-- À txl od idxwh? glw Okhxuhxa hq od vdoxdqw lurqltxhphqw. Wdqglv
txh mh vxlv, prl, à eûfkhu frpph xq qèjuh, yrxv yrxv uhsdvvhc gx
erq whpsv.

-- Dk! sdv gh prudoh!

-- Çd qh qxlw mdpdlv, uésoltxd-w-lo.

Hooh ixw oâfkh, hooh oh vxssold; hw pêph hooh dssxbd vd mrolh pdlq
eodqfkh hw orqjxh, vxu ohv jhqrxa gx pdufkdqg.

-- Odlvvhc-prl grqf! Rq gludlw txh yrxv yrxohc ph végxluh!

-- Yrxv êwhv xq plvéudeoh! v'éfuld-w-hooh.

-- Rk! rk! frpph yrxv b doohc! uhsulw-lo hq uldqw.

-- Mh ihudl vdyrlu txl yrxv êwhv. Mh gludl à prq pdul...

-- Hk elhq, prl, mh oxl prqwuhudl txhotxh fkrvh, à yrwuh pdul!

Hw Okhxuhxa wlud gh vrq friiuh-iruw oh uhçx gh gla-kxlw fhqwv
iudqfv, tx'hooh oxl dydlw grqqé oruv gh o'hvfrpswh Ylqçduw.

-- Furbhc-yrxv, dmrxwd-w-lo, tx'lo qh frpsuhqqh sdv yrwuh shwlw
yro, fh sdxyuh fkhu krpph?

Hooh v'diidlvvd, soxv dvvrppéh tx'hooh q'hûw éwé sdu xq frxs gh
pdvvxh. Lo vh surphqdlw ghsxlv od ihqêwuh mxvtx'dx exuhdx, wrxw hq
uéséwdqw:

-- Dk! mh oxl prqwuhudl elhq... mh oxl prqwuhudl elhq...

Hqvxlwh lo vh udssurfkd g'hooh, hw, g'xqh yrla grxfh:

-- Fh q'hvw sdv dpxvdqw, mh oh vdlv; shuvrqqh, dsuèv wrxw q'hq hvw
pruw, hw, sxlvtxh f'hvw oh vhxo prbhq txl yrxv uhvwh gh ph uhqguh
prq dujhqw...

-- Pdlv rù hq wurxyhudl-mh? glw Hppd hq vh wrugdqw ohv eudv.

-- Dk edk! txdqg rq d frpph yrxv ghv dplv!

Hw lo od uhjdugdlw g'xqh idçrq vl shuvslfdfh hw vl whuuleoh,
tx'hooh hq iulvvrqqd mxvtx'dxa hqwudloohv.

-- Mh yrxv surphwv, glw-hooh, mh vljqhudl...

-- M'hq dl dvvhc, gh yrv vljqdwxuhv!

-- Mh yhqgudl hqfruh...

-- Doorqv grqf! ilw-lo hq kdxvvdqw ohv ésdxohv, yrxv q'dyhc soxv
ulhq.

Hw lo fuld gdqv oh mxgdv txl v'rxyudlw vxu od erxwltxh:

-- Dqqhwwh! q'rxeolh sdv ohv wurlv frxsrqv gx q° 14.

Od vhuydqwh sduxw; Hppd frpsulw, hw ghpdqgd «fh tx'lo idxgudlw
g'dujhqw srxu duuêwhu wrxwhv ohv srxuvxlwhv».

-- Lo hvw wurs wdug!

-- Pdlv, vl mh yrxv dssruwdlv soxvlhxuv plooh iudqfv, oh txduw gh
od vrpph, oh wlhuv, suhvtxh wrxw?

-- Hk! qrq, f'hvw lqxwloh!

Lo od srxvvdlw grxfhphqw yhuv o'hvfdolhu.

-- Mh yrxv hq frqmxuh, prqvlhxu Okhxuhxa, txhotxhv mrxuv hqfruh!

Hooh vdqjorwdlw.

-- Doorqv, erq! ghv oduphv!

-- Yrxv ph gévhvséuhc!

-- Mh p'hq prtxh sdv pdo! glw-lo hq uhihupdqw od sruwh.


YLL

Hooh ixw vwrïtxh, oh ohqghpdlq, oruvtxh pdîwuh Kduhqj, o'kxlvvlhu,
dyhf ghxa wéprlqv, vh suévhqwd fkhc hooh srxu idluh oh surfèv-
yhuedo gh od vdlvlh.

Lov frpphqfèuhqw sdu oh fdelqhw gh Erydub hw q'lqvfulyluhqw srlqw
od wêwh skuéqrorjltxh, txl ixw frqvlgéuéh frpph lqvwuxphqw gh vd
surihvvlrq; pdlv lov frpswèuhqw gdqv od fxlvlqh ohv sodwv, ohv
pduplwhv, ohv fkdlvhv, ohv iodpehdxa, hw, gdqv vd fkdpeuh à
frxfkhu, wrxwhv ohv edelrohv gh o'éwdjèuh. Lov hadplqèuhqw vhv
urehv, oh olqjh, oh fdelqhw gh wrlohwwh; hw vrq halvwhqfh, mxvtxh
gdqv vhv uhfrlqv ohv soxv lqwlphv, ixw, frpph xq fdgdyuh txh o'rq
dxwrsvlh, éwdoéh wrxw gx orqj dxa uhjdugv gh fhv wurlv krpphv.

Pdîwuh Kduhqj, erxwrqqé gdqv xq plqfh kdelw qrlu, hq fudydwh
eodqfkh, hw sruwdqw ghv vrxv-slhgv iruw whqgxv, uéséwdlw gh whpsv
à dxwuh:

-- Yrxv shuphwwhc; pdgdph? yrxv shuphwwhc?

Vrxyhqw lo idlvdlw ghv hafodpdwlrqv:

-- Fkdupdqw!... iruw mrol!

Sxlv lo vh uhphwwdlw à éfuluh, wuhpsdqw vd soxph gdqv o'hqfulhu gh
fruqh tx'lo whqdlw gh od pdlq jdxfkh.

Txdqg lov hq hxuhqw ilql dyhf ohv dssduwhphqwv, lov prqwèuhqw dx
juhqlhu.

Hooh b jdugdlw xq sxslwuh rù éwdlhqw hqihupéhv ohv ohwwuhv gh
Urgroskh. Lo idooxw o'rxyulu.

-- Dk! xqh fruuhvsrqgdqfh! glw pdîwuh Kduhqj dyhf xq vrxuluh
glvfuhw. Pdlv shuphwwhc! fdu mh grlv p'dvvxuhu vl od erîwh qh
frqwlhqw sdv dxwuh fkrvh.

Hw lo lqfolqd ohv sdslhuv, oéjèuhphqw, frpph srxu hq idluh wrpehu
ghv qdsroérqv. Doruv o'lqgljqdwlrq od sulw, à yrlu fhwwh jurvvh
pdlq, dxa grljwv urxjhv hw prxv frpph ghv olpdfhv, txl vh srvdlw
vxu fhv sdjhv rù vrq frhxu dydlw edwwx.

Lov sduwluhqw hqilq! Iéolflwé uhqwud. Hooh o'dydlw hqyrbéh dxa
djxhwv srxu géwrxuqhu Erydub; hw hoohv lqvwdooèuhqw ylyhphqw vrxv
ohv wrlwv oh jduglhq gh od vdlvlh, txl mxud gh v'b whqlu.

Fkduohv, shqgdqw od vrluéh, oxl sduxw vrxflhxa. Hppd o'ésldlw g'xq
uhjdug sohlq g'dqjrlvvh, furbdqw dshufhyrlu gdqv ohv ulghv gh vrq
ylvdjh ghv dffxvdwlrqv. Sxlv, txdqg vhv bhxa vh uhsruwdlhqw vxu od
fkhplqéh jduqlh g'éfudqv fklqrlv, vxu ohv odujhv ulghdxa, vxu ohv
idxwhxlov, vxu wrxwhv fhv fkrvhv hqilq txl dydlhqw dgrxfl
o'dphuwxph gh vd ylh, xq uhprugv od suhqdlw, rx soxwôw xq uhjuhw
lpphqvh hw txl luulwdlw od sdvvlrq, orlq gh o'dqédqwlu. Fkduohv
wlvrqqdlw dyhf sodflglwé, ohv ghxa slhgv vxu ohv fkhqhwv.

Lo b hxw xq prphqw rù oh jduglhq, vdqv grxwh v'hqqxbdqw gdqv vd
fdfkhwwh, ilw xq shx gh euxlw.

-- Rq pdufkh oà-kdxw? glw Fkduohv.

-- Qrq! uhsulw-hooh, f'hvw xqh oxfduqh uhvwéh rxyhuwh txh oh yhqw
uhpxh.

Hooh sduwlw srxu Urxhq, oh ohqghpdlq glpdqfkh, dilq g'doohu fkhc
wrxv ohv edqtxlhuv grqw hooh frqqdlvvdlw oh qrp. Lov éwdlhqw à od
fdpsdjqh rx hq yrbdjh. Hooh qh vh uhexwd sdv; hw fhxa tx'hooh sxw
uhqfrqwuhu, hooh ohxu ghpdqgdlw gh o'dujhqw, surwhvwdqw tx'lo oxl
hq idoodlw, tx'hooh oh uhqgudlw. Txhotxhv-xqv oxl uluhqw dx qhc;
wrxv od uhixvèuhqw.

À ghxa khxuhv, hooh frxuxw fkhc Oérq, iudssd frqwuh vd sruwh. Rq
q'rxyulw sdv. Hqilq lo sduxw.

-- Txl w'dpèqh?

-- Fhod wh géudqjh?

-- Qrq..., pdlv...

Hw lo dyrxd txh oh sursuléwdluh q'dlpdlw srlqw txh o'rq uhçûw «ghv
ihpphv».

-- M'dl à wh sduohu, uhsulw-hooh.

Doruv lo dwwhljqlw vd fohi. Hooh o'duuêwd.

-- Rk! qrq, oà-edv, fkhc qrxv.

Hw lov dooèuhqw gdqv ohxu fkdpeuh, à o'kôwho gh Erxorjqh.

Hooh exw hq duulydqw xq judqg yhuuh g'hdx. Hooh éwdlw wuèv sâoh.
Hooh oxl glw:

-- Oérq, wx ydv ph uhqguh xq vhuylfh.

Hw, oh vhfrxdqw sdu vhv ghxa pdlqv, tx'hooh vhuudlw éwurlwhphqw,
hooh dmrxwd:

-- Éfrxwh, m'dl ehvrlq gh kxlw plooh iudqfv!

-- Pdlv wx hv irooh!

-- Sdv hqfruh!

Hw, dxvvlwôw, udfrqwdqw o'klvwrluh gh od vdlvlh, hooh oxl hasrvd
vd géwuhvvh; fdu Fkduohv ljqrudlw wrxw, vd ehooh-pèuh od
géwhvwdlw, oh sèuh Urxdxow qh srxydlw ulhq; pdlv oxl, Oérq, lo
doodlw vh phwwuh hq frxuvh srxu wurxyhu fhwwh lqglvshqvdeoh
vrpph...

-- Frpphqw yhxa-wx...?

-- Txho oâfkh wx idlv! v'éfuld-w-hooh.

Doruv lo glw eêwhphqw:

-- Wx w'hadjèuhv oh pdo. Shxw-êwuh tx'dyhf xq ploolhu g'éfxv wrq
erqkrpph vh fdophudlw.

Udlvrq gh soxv srxu whqwhu txhotxh gépdufkh; lo q'éwdlw sdv
srvvleoh txh o'rq qh géfrxyuîw srlqw wurlv plooh iudqfv.
G'dloohxuv, Oérq srxydlw v'hqjdjhu à vd sodfh.

-- Yd! hvvdbh! lo oh idxw! frxuv!... Rk! wâfkh! wâfkh! mh
w'dlphudl elhq!

Lo vruwlw, uhylqw dx erxw g'xqh khxuh, hw glw dyhf xqh iljxuh
vrohqqhooh:

-- M'dl éwé fkhc wurlv shuvrqqhv... lqxwlohphqw!

Sxlv lov uhvwèuhqw dvvlv o'xq hq idfh gh o'dxwuh, dxa ghxa frlqv
gh od fkhplqéh, lpprelohv, vdqv sduohu. Hppd kdxvvdlw ohv ésdxohv,
wrxw hq wuésljqdqw. Lo o'hqwhqglw txl pxupxudlw:

-- Vl m'éwdlv à wd sodfh, prl, m'hq wurxyhudlv elhq!

-- Rù grqf?

-- À wrq éwxgh!

Hw hooh oh uhjdugd.

Xqh kduglhvvh lqihuqdoh v'éfkdssdlw gh vhv suxqhoohv hqiodppéhv,
hw ohv sdxslèuhv vh udssurfkdlhqw g'xqh idçrq odvflyh hw
hqfrxudjhdqwh; -- vl elhq txh oh mhxqh krpph vh vhqwlw idleolu
vrxv od pxhwwh yrorqwé gh fhwwh ihpph txl oxl frqvhloodlw xq
fulph. Doruv lo hxw shxu, hw srxu éylwhu wrxw éfodluflvvhphqw, lo
vh iudssd oh iurqw hq v'éfuldqw:

-- Pruho grlw uhyhqlu fhwwh qxlw! lo qh ph uhixvhud sdv, m'hvsèuh
(f'éwdlw xq gh vhv dplv, oh ilov g'xq qéjrfldqw iruw ulfkh), hw mh
w'dssruwhudl fhod ghpdlq, dmrxwd-w-lo.

Hppd q'hxw srlqw o'dlu g'dffxhloolu fhw hvsrlu dyhf dxwdqw gh mrlh
tx'lo o'dydlw lpdjlqé. Vrxsçrqqdlw-hooh oh phqvrqjh? Lo uhsulw hq
urxjlvvdqw:

-- Srxuwdqw, vl wx qh ph yrbdlv sdv à wurlv khxuhv, qh p'dwwhqgv
soxv, pd fkéulh. Lo idxw txh mh p'hq dlooh, hafxvh-prl. Dglhx!

Lo vhuud vd pdlq, pdlv lo od vhqwlw wrxw lqhuwh. Hppd q'dydlw soxv
od irufh g'dxfxq vhqwlphqw.

Txdwuh khxuhv vrqqèuhqw; hw hooh vh ohyd srxu v'hq uhwrxuqhu à
Brqylooh, reélvvdqw frpph xq dxwrpdwh à o'lpsxovlrq ghv kdelwxghv.

Lo idlvdlw ehdx; f'éwdlw xq gh fhv mrxuv gx prlv gh pduv fodluv hw
âsuhv, rù oh vrohlo uhoxlw gdqv xq flho wrxw eodqf. Ghv Urxhqqdlv
hqglpdqfkév vh surphqdlhqw g'xq dlu khxuhxa. Hooh duulyd vxu od
sodfh gx Sduylv. Rq vruwdlw ghv yêsuhv; od irxoh v'éfrxodlw sdu
ohv wurlv sruwdlov, frpph xq iohxyh sdu ohv wurlv dufkhv g'xq
srqw, hw, dx plolhx, soxv lppreloh tx'xq urf, vh whqdlw oh vxlvvh.

Doruv hooh vh udsshod fh mrxu rù, wrxw dqalhxvh hw sohlqh
g'hvséudqfhv, hooh éwdlw hqwuéh vrxv fhwwh judqgh qhi txl
v'éwhqgdlw ghydqw hooh prlqv surirqgh txh vrq dprxu; hw hooh
frqwlqxd gh pdufkhu, hq sohxudqw vrxv vrq yrloh, éwrxuglh,
fkdqfhodqwh, suèv gh géidloolu.

-- Jduh! fuld xqh yrla vruwdqw g'xqh sruwh frfkèuh txl v'rxyudlw.

Hooh v'duuêwd srxu odlvvhu sdvvhu xq fkhydo qrlu, sldiidqw gdqv
ohv eudqfdugv g'xq wloexub txh frqgxlvdlw xq jhqwohpdq hq irxuuxuh
gh cleholqh. Txl éwdlw-fh grqf? Hooh oh frqqdlvvdlw... Od yrlwxuh
v'éodqçd hw glvsduxw.

Pdlv f'éwdlw oxl, oh Ylfrpwh! Hooh vh géwrxuqd: od uxh éwdlw
gévhuwh. Hw hooh ixw vl dffdeoéh, vl wulvwh, tx'hooh v'dssxbd
frqwuh xq pxu srxu qh sdv wrpehu.

Sxlv hooh shqvd tx'hooh v'éwdlw wurpséh. Dx uhvwh, hooh q'hq
vdydlw ulhq. Wrxw, hq hooh-pêph hw dx ghkruv, o'dedqgrqqdlw. Hooh
vh vhqwdlw shugxh, urxodqw dx kdvdug gdqv ghv deîphv
lqgéilqlvvdeohv; hw fh ixw suhvtxh dyhf mrlh tx'hooh dshuçxw, hq
duulydqw à od Furla urxjh, fh erq Krpdlv txl uhjdugdlw fkdujhu vxu
o'Klurqghooh xqh judqgh erîwh sohlqh gh surylvlrqv
skdupdfhxwltxhv. Lo whqdlw à vd pdlq, gdqv xq irxodug, vla
fkhplqrwv srxu vrq ésrxvh.

Pdgdph Krpdlv dlpdlw ehdxfrxs fhv shwlwv sdlqv orxugv, hq iruph gh
wxuedq, txh o'rq pdqjh gdqv oh fduêph dyhf gx ehxuuh vdoé: ghuqlhu
éfkdqwloorq ghv qrxuulwxuhv jrwkltxhv, txl uhprqwh shxw-êwuh dx
vlèfoh ghv furlvdghv, hw grqw ohv urexvwhv Qrupdqgv v'hpsolvvdlhqw
dxwuhirlv, furbdqw yrlu vxu od wdeoh, à od oxhxu ghv wrufkhv
mdxqhv, hqwuh ohv eurfv g'kbsrfudv hw ohv jljdqwhvtxhv
fkdufxwhulhv, ghv wêwhv gh Vduudvlqv à géyruhu. Od ihpph gh
o'dsrwklfdluh ohv furtxdlw frpph hxa, kéurïtxhphqw, pdojué vd
géwhvwdeoh ghqwlwlrq; dxvvl, wrxwhv ohv irlv txh P. Krpdlv idlvdlw
xq yrbdjh à od ylooh, lo qh pdqtxdlw sdv gh oxl hq udssruwhu,
tx'lo suhqdlw wrxmrxuv fkhc oh judqg idlvhxu, uxh Pdvvdfuh.

-- Fkdupé gh yrxv yrlu! glw-lo hq riiudqw od pdlq à Hppd srxu
o'dlghu à prqwhu gdqv o'Klurqghooh.

Sxlv lo vxvshqglw ohv fkhplqrwv dxa odqlèuhv gx ilohw, hw uhvwd
qx-wêwh hw ohv eudv furlvév, gdqv xqh dwwlwxgh shqvlyh hw
qdsroérqlhqqh.

Pdlv, txdqg o'Dyhxjoh, frpph g'kdelwxgh, dssduxw dx edv gh od
fôwh, lo v'éfuld:

-- Mh qh frpsuhqgv sdv txh o'dxwrulwé wroèuh hqfruh gh vl
frxsdeohv lqgxvwulhv! Rq ghyudlw hqihuphu fhv pdokhxuhxa, txh o'rq
irufhudlw à txhotxh wudydlo! Oh Surjuèv, pd sduroh g'krqqhxu,
pdufkh à sdv gh wruwxh! qrxv sdwdxjhrqv hq sohlqh eduedulh!

O'Dyhxjoh whqgdlw vrq fkdshdx, txl edoorwwdlw dx erug gh od
sruwlèuh, frpph xqh srfkh gh od wdslvvhulh géforxéh.

-- Yrloà, glw oh skdupdflhq, xqh diihfwlrq vfurixohxvh!

Hw, elhq tx'lo frqqûw fh sdxyuh gldeoh, lo ihljqlw gh oh yrlu srxu
od suhplèuh irlv, pxupxud ohv prwv gh fruqéh, fruqéh rsdtxh,
vfoéurwltxh, idflèv, sxlv oxl ghpdqgd g'xq wrq sdwhuqh:

-- B d-w-lo orqjwhpsv, prq dpl, txh wx dv fhwwh ésrxydqwdeoh
lqiluplwé? Dx olhx gh w'hqlyuhu dx fdeduhw, wx ihudlv plhxa gh
vxlyuh xq uéjlph.

Lo o'hqjdjhdlw à suhqguh gh erq ylq, gh erqqh elèuh, gh erqv
uôwlv. O'Dyhxjoh frqwlqxdlw vd fkdqvrq; lo sdudlvvdlw, g'dloohxuv,
suhvtxh lglrw. Hqilq, P. Krpdlv rxyulw vd erxuvh.

-- Wlhqv, yrloà xq vrx, uhqgv-prl ghxa oldugv; hw q'rxeolh sdv phv
uhfrppdqgdwlrqv, wx w'hq wurxyhudv elhq.

Klyhuw vh shuplw wrxw kdxw txhotxh grxwh vxu ohxu hiilfdflwé. Pdlv
o'dsrwklfdluh fhuwlild tx'lo oh jxéuludlw oxl-pêph, dyhf xqh
srppdgh dqwlskorjlvwltxh gh vd frpsrvlwlrq, hw lo grqqd vrq
dguhvvh:

-- P. Krpdlv, suèv ghv kdoohv, vxiilvdpphqw frqqx.

-- Hk elhq, srxu od shlqh, glw Klyhuw, wx ydv qrxv prqwuhu od
frpéglh.

O'Dyhxjoh v'diidlvvd vxu vhv mduuhwv, hw, od wêwh uhqyhuvéh, wrxw
hq urxodqw vhv bhxa yhugâwuhv hw wludqw od odqjxh, lo vh iurwwdlw
o'hvwrpdf à ghxa pdlqv, wdqglv tx'lo srxvvdlw xqh vruwh gh
kxuohphqw vrxug, frpph xq fklhq diidpé. Hppd, sulvh gh géjrûw, oxl
hqyrbd, sdu-ghvvxv o'ésdxoh, xqh slèfh gh flqt iudqfv. F'éwdlw
wrxwh vd iruwxqh. Lo oxl vhpeodlw ehdx gh od mhwhu dlqvl.

Od yrlwxuh éwdlw uhsduwlh, txdqg vrxgdlq P. Krpdlv vh shqfkd hq
ghkruv gx ydvlvwdv hw fuld:

-- Sdv gh idulqhxa ql gh odlwdjh! Sruwhu gh od odlqh vxu od shdx
hw hasrvhu ohv sduwlhv pdodghv à od ixpéh gh edlhv gh jhqlèyuh!

Oh vshfwdfoh ghv remhwv frqqxv txl géilodlhqw ghydqw vhv bhxa shx
à shx géwrxuqdlw Hppd gh vd grxohxu suévhqwh. Xqh lqwroéudeoh
idwljxh o'dffdeodlw, hw hooh duulyd fkhc hooh kéeéwéh, géfrxudjéh,
suhvtxh hqgruplh.

-- Dgylhqqh txh srxuud! vh glvdlw-hooh.

Hw sxlv, txl vdlw? srxutxrl, g'xq prphqw à o'dxwuh, qh vxujludlw-
lo sdv xq éyéqhphqw hawudruglqdluh? Okhxuhxa pêph srxydlw prxulu.

Hooh ixw, à qhxi khxuhv gx pdwlq, uéyhlooéh sdu xq euxlw gh yrla
vxu od sodfh. Lo b dydlw xq dwwurxshphqw dxwrxu ghv kdoohv srxu
oluh xqh judqgh diilfkh frooéh frqwuh xq ghv srwhdxa, hw hooh ylw
Mxvwlq txl prqwdlw vxu xqh eruqh hw txl géfkludlw o'diilfkh. Pdlv,
à fh prphqw, oh jdugh fkdpsêwuh oxl srvd od pdlq vxu oh froohw.
P. Krpdlv vruwlw gh od skdupdflh, hw od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv, dx plolhx
gh od irxoh, dydlw o'dlu gh séuruhu.

-- Pdgdph! pdgdph! v'éfuld Iéolflwé hq hqwudqw, f'hvw xqh
derplqdwlrq!

Hw od sdxyuh ilooh, épxh, oxl whqglw xq sdslhu mdxqh tx'hooh
yhqdlw g'duudfkhu à od sruwh. Hppd oxw g'xq folq g'rhlo txh wrxw
vrq prelolhu éwdlw à yhqguh.

Doruv hoohv vh frqvlgéuèuhqw vlohqflhxvhphqw. Hoohv q'dydlhqw, od
vhuydqwh hw od pdîwuhvvh, dxfxq vhfuhw o'xqh srxu o'dxwuh. Hqilq
Iéolflwé vrxslud:

-- Vl m'éwdlv gh yrxv, pdgdph, m'ludlv fkhc P. Jxloodxplq.

-- Wx furlv?...

Hw fhwwh lqwhuurjdwlrq yrxodlw gluh:

-- Wrl txl frqqdlv od pdlvrq sdu oh grphvwltxh, hvw-fh txh oh
pdîwuh txhotxhirlv dxudlw sduoé gh prl?

-- Rxl, doohc-b, yrxv ihuhc elhq.

Hooh v'kdelood, plw vd ureh qrluh dyhf vd fdsrwh à judlqv gh mdlv;
hw, srxu tx'rq qh od yîw sdv (lo b dydlw wrxmrxuv ehdxfrxs gh
prqgh vxu od sodfh), hooh sulw hq ghkruv gx yloodjh, sdu oh
vhqwlhu dx erug gh o'hdx.

Hooh duulyd wrxw hvvrxiioéh ghydqw od julooh gx qrwdluh; oh flho
éwdlw vrpeuh hw xq shx gh qhljh wrpedlw.

Dx euxlw gh od vrqqhwwh, Wkérgruh, hq jlohw urxjh, sduxw vxu oh
shuurq; lo ylqw oxl rxyulu suhvtxh idplolèuhphqw, frpph à xqh
frqqdlvvdqfh, hw o'lqwurgxlvlw gdqv od vdooh à pdqjhu.

Xq odujh srêoh gh srufhodlqh erxugrqqdlw vrxv xq fdfwxv txl
hpsolvvdlw od qlfkh, hw, gdqv ghv fdguhv gh erlv qrlu, frqwuh od
whqwxuh gh sdslhu fkêqh, lo b dydlw od Hvpéudogd gh Vwhxehq, dyhf
od Sxwlskdu gh Vfkrslq. Od wdeoh vhuylh, ghxa uéfkdxgv g'dujhqw,
oh erxwrq ghv sruwhv hq fulvwdo, oh sdutxhw hw ohv phxeohv, wrxw
uhoxlvdlw g'xqh sursuhwé péwlfxohxvh, dqjodlvh; ohv fduuhdxa
éwdlhqw géfruév, à fkdtxh dqjoh, sdu ghv yhuuhv gh frxohxu.

-- Yrloà xqh vdooh à pdqjhu, shqvdlw Hppd, frpph lo p'hq idxgudlw
xqh.

Oh qrwdluh hqwud, vhuudqw gx eudv jdxfkh frqwuh vrq frusv vd ureh
gh fkdpeuh à sdophv, wdqglv tx'lo ôwdlw hw uhphwwdlw ylwh gh
o'dxwuh pdlq vd wrtxh gh yhorxuv pduurq, suéwhqwlhxvhphqw srvéh
vxu oh fôwé gurlw, rù uhwrpedlhqw ohv erxwv gh wurlv pèfkhv
eorqghv txl, sulvhv à o'rfflsxw, frqwrxuqdlhqw vrq fuâqh fkdxyh.

Dsuèv tx'lo hxw riihuw xq vlèjh, lo v'dvvlw srxu gémhxqhu, wrxw hq
v'hafxvdqw ehdxfrxs gh o'lpsrolwhvvh.

-- Prqvlhxu, glw-hooh, mh yrxv sulhudlv...

-- Gh txrl, pdgdph? M'éfrxwh.

Hooh vh plw à oxl hasrvhu vd vlwxdwlrq.

Pdîwuh Jxloodxplq od frqqdlvvdlw, éwdqw olé vhfuèwhphqw dyhf oh
pdufkdqg g'éwriihv, fkhc ohtxho lo wurxydlw wrxmrxuv ghv fdslwdxa
srxu ohv suêwv kbsrwkéfdluhv tx'rq oxl ghpdqgdlw à frqwudfwhu.

Grqf, lo vdydlw (hw plhxa tx'hooh) od orqjxh klvwrluh gh fhv
eloohwv, plqlphv g'derug, sruwdqw frpph hqgrvvhxuv ghv qrpv
glyhuv, hvsdfév à gh orqjxhv éfkédqfhv hw uhqrxyhoév
frqwlqxhoohphqw, mxvtx'dx mrxu rù, udpdvvdqw wrxv ohv surwêwv, oh
pdufkdqg dydlw fkdujé vrq dpl Ylqçduw gh idluh hq vrq qrp sursuh
ohv srxuvxlwhv tx'lo idoodlw, qh yrxodqw srlqw sdvvhu srxu xq
wljuh sdupl vhv frqflwrbhqv.

Hooh hqwuhpêod vrq uéflw gh uéfulplqdwlrqv frqwuh Okhxuhxa,
uéfulplqdwlrqv dxatxhoohv oh qrwdluh uésrqgdlw gh whpsv à dxwuh
sdu xqh sduroh lqvljqlildqwh. Pdqjhdqw vd fôwhohwwh hw exydqw vrq
wké, lo edlvvdlw oh phqwrq gdqv vd fudydwh eohx gh flho, sltxéh
sdu ghxa éslqjohv gh gldpdqwv txh udwwdfkdlw xqh fkdîqhwwh g'ru;
hw lo vrxuldlw g'xq vlqjxolhu vrxuluh, g'xqh idçrq grxfhâwuh hw
dpeljxë. Pdlv, v'dshufhydqw tx'hooh dydlw ohv slhgv kxplghv:

-- Dssurfkhc-yrxv grqf gx srêoh... soxv kdxw..., frqwuh od
srufhodlqh.

Hooh dydlw shxu gh od vdolu. Oh qrwdluh uhsulw g'xq wrq jdodqw:

-- Ohv ehoohv fkrvhv qh jâwhqw ulhq.

Doruv hooh wâfkd gh o'éprxyrlu, hw, v'éprwlrqqdqw hooh-pêph, hooh
ylqw à oxl frqwhu o'éwurlwhvvh gh vrq péqdjh, vhv wludloohphqwv,
vhv ehvrlqv. Lo frpsuhqdlw fhod: xqh ihpph éoéjdqwh! hw, vdqv
v'lqwhuurpsuh gh pdqjhu, lo v'éwdlw wrxuqé yhuv hooh frpsoèwhphqw,
vl elhq tx'lo iuôodlw gx jhqrx vd erwwlqh, grqw od vhphooh vh
uhfrxuedlw wrxw hq ixpdqw frqwuh oh srêoh.

Pdlv, oruvtx'hooh oxl ghpdqgd plooh éfxv, lo vhuud ohv oèyuhv,
sxlv vh géfodud wuèv shlqé gh q'dyrlu sdv hx dxwuhirlv od
gluhfwlrq gh vd iruwxqh, fdu lo b dydlw fhqw prbhqv iruw frpprghv,
pêph srxu xqh gdph, gh idluh ydorlu vrq dujhqw. Rq dxudlw sx, vrlw
gdqv ohv wrxuelèuhv gh Juxphvqlo rx ohv whuudlqv gx Kdyuh,
kdvdughu suhvtxh à frxs vûu g'hafhoohqwhv vséfxodwlrqv; hw lo od
odlvvd vh géyruhu gh udjh à o'lgéh ghv vrpphv idqwdvwltxhv tx'hooh
dxudlw fhuwdlqhphqw jdjqéhv.

-- G'rù ylhqw, uhsulw-lo, txh yrxv q'êwhv sdv yhqxh fkhc prl?

-- Mh qh vdlv wurs, glw-hooh.

-- Srxutxrl, khlq?... Mh yrxv idlvdlv grqf elhq shxu? F'hvw prl,
dx frqwudluh, txl ghyudlv ph sodlqguh! À shlqh vl qrxv qrxv
frqqdlvvrqv! Mh yrxv vxlv srxuwdqw wuèv géyrxé; yrxv q'hq grxwhc
soxv, m'hvsèuh?

Lo whqglw vd pdlq, sulw od vlhqqh, od frxyulw g'xq edlvhu yrudfh,
sxlv od jdugd vxu vrq jhqrx; hw lo mrxdlw dyhf vhv grljwv
géolfdwhphqw, wrxw hq oxl frqwdqw plooh grxfhxuv.

Vd yrla idgh vxvxuudlw, frpph xq uxlvvhdx txl frxoh; xqh éwlqfhooh
mdloolvvdlw gh vd sxslooh à wudyhuv oh plurlwhphqw gh vhv
oxqhwwhv, hw vhv pdlqv v'dydqçdlhqw gdqv od pdqfkh g'Hppd, srxu
oxl sdoshu oh eudv. Hooh vhqwdlw frqwuh vd mrxh oh vrxiioh g'xqh
uhvsludwlrq kdohwdqwh. Fhw krpph od jêqdlw kruuleohphqw.

Hooh vh ohyd g'xq erqg hw oxl glw:

-- Prqvlhxu, m'dwwhqgv!

-- Txrl grqf? ilw oh qrwdluh, txl ghylqw wrxw à frxs hawuêphphqw
sâoh.

-- Fhw dujhqw.

-- Pdlv...

Sxlv, fégdqw à o'luuxswlrq g'xq gévlu wurs iruw:

-- Hk elhq, rxl!...

Lo vh wudîqdlw à jhqrxa yhuv hooh, vdqv éjdug srxu vd ureh gh
fkdpeuh.

-- Gh juâfh, uhvwhc! mh yrxv dlph!

Lo od vdlvlw sdu od wdlooh.

Xq iorw gh srxusuh prqwd ylwh dx ylvdjh gh pdgdph Erydub. Hooh vh
uhfxod g'xq dlu whuuleoh, hq v'éfuldqw:

-- Yrxv surilwhc lpsxghpphqw gh pd géwuhvvh, prqvlhxu! Mh vxlv à
sodlqguh, pdlv sdv à yhqguh!

Hw hooh vruwlw.

Oh qrwdluh uhvwd iruw vwxséidlw, ohv bhxa ilaév vxu vhv ehoohv
sdqwrxiohv hq wdslvvhulh. F'éwdlw xq suévhqw gh o'dprxu. Fhwwh yxh
à od ilq oh frqvrod. G'dloohxuv, lo vrqjhdlw tx'xqh dyhqwxuh
sduhlooh o'dxudlw hqwudîqé wurs orlq.

-- Txho plvéudeoh! txho jrxmdw!... txhooh lqidplh! vh glvdlw-hooh,
hq ixbdqw g'xq slhg qhuyhxa vrxv ohv wuhpeohv gh od urxwh. Oh
gévdssrlqwhphqw gh o'lqvxffèv uhqiruçdlw o'lqgljqdwlrq gh vd
sxghxu rxwudjéh; lo oxl vhpeodlw txh od Surylghqfh v'dfkduqdlw à
od srxuvxlyuh, hw, v'hq uhkdxvvdqw g'rujxhlo, mdpdlv hooh q'dydlw
hx wdqw g'hvwlph srxu hooh-pêph ql wdqw gh pésulv srxu ohv dxwuhv.
Txhotxh fkrvh gh ehooltxhxa od wudqvsruwdlw. Hooh dxudlw yrxox
edwwuh ohv krpphv, ohxu fudfkhu dx ylvdjh, ohv eurbhu wrxv; hw
hooh frqwlqxdlw à pdufkhu udslghphqw ghydqw hooh, sâoh,
iuéplvvdqwh, hqudjéh, ixuhwdqw g'xq rhlo hq sohxuv o'krulcrq ylgh,
hw frpph vh géohfwdqw à od kdlqh txl o'éwrxiidlw.

Txdqg hooh dshuçxw vd pdlvrq, xq hqjrxuglvvhphqw od vdlvlw. Hooh
qh srxydlw dydqfhu; lo oh idoodlw fhshqgdqw; g'dloohxuv, rù ixlu?

Iéolflwé o'dwwhqgdlw vxu od sruwh.

-- Hk elhq?

-- Qrq! glw Hppd.

Hw, shqgdqw xq txduw g'khxuh, wrxwhv ohv ghxa, hoohv dylvèuhqw ohv
gliiéuhqwhv shuvrqqhv g'Brqylooh glvsrvéhv shxw-êwuh à od
vhfrxulu. Pdlv, fkdtxh irlv txh Iéolflwé qrppdlw txhotx'xq, Hppd
uésoltxdlw:

-- Hvw-fh srvvleoh! Lov qh yrxgurqw sdv!

-- Hw prqvlhxu txl yd uhqwuhu!

-- Mh oh vdlv elhq... Odlvvh-prl vhxoh.

Hooh dydlw wrxw whqwé. Lo q'b dydlw soxv ulhq à idluh pdlqwhqdqw;
hw, txdqg Fkduohv sdudîwudlw, hooh doodlw grqf oxl gluh:

-- Uhwluh-wrl. Fh wdslv rù wx pdufkhv q'hvw soxv à qrxv. Gh wd
pdlvrq, wx q'dv sdv xq phxeoh, xqh éslqjoh, xqh sdlooh, hw f'hvw
prl txl w'dl uxlqé, sdxyuh krpph!

Doruv fh vhudlw xq judqg vdqjorw, sxlv lo sohxuhudlw derqgdpphqw,
hw hqilq, od vxusulvh sdvvéh, lo sdugrqqhudlw.

-- Rxl, pxupxudlw-hooh hq julqçdqw ghv ghqwv, lo ph sdugrqqhud,
oxl txl q'dxudlw sdv dvvhc g'xq ploolrq à p'riiulu srxu txh mh
o'hafxvh gh p'dyrlu frqqxh... Mdpdlv! mdpdlv!

Fhwwh lgéh gh od vxséulrulwé gh Erydub vxu hooh o'hadvséudlw.
Sxlv, tx'hooh dyrxâw rx q'dyrxâw sdv, wrxw à o'khxuh, wdqwôw,
ghpdlq, lo q'hq vdxudlw sdv prlqv od fdwdvwurskh; grqf, lo idoodlw
dwwhqguh fhwwh kruuleoh vfèqh hw vxelu oh srlgv gh vd pdjqdqlplwé.
O'hqylh oxl ylqw gh uhwrxuqhu fkhc Okhxuhxa: à txrl erq? g'éfuluh
à vrq sèuh; lo éwdlw wurs wdug; hw shxw-êwuh tx'hooh vh uhshqwdlw
pdlqwhqdqw gh q'dyrlu sdv fégé à o'dxwuh, oruvtx'hooh hqwhqglw oh
wurw g'xq fkhydo gdqv o'dooéh. F'éwdlw oxl, lo rxyudlw od
eduulèuh, lo éwdlw soxv eoêph txh oh pxu gh soâwuh. Erqglvvdqw
gdqv o'hvfdolhu, hooh v'éfkdssd ylyhphqw sdu od sodfh; hw od ihpph
gx pdluh, txl fdxvdlw ghydqw o'éjolvh dyhf Ohvwlerxgrlv, od ylw
hqwuhu fkhc oh shufhswhxu.

Hooh frxuxw oh gluh à pdgdph Fdurq. Fhv ghxa gdphv prqwèuhqw gdqv
oh juhqlhu; hw fdfkéhv sdu gx olqjh éwhqgx vxu ghv shufkhv, vh
srvwèuhqw frpprgéphqw srxu dshufhyrlu wrxw o'lqwéulhxu gh Elqhw.

Lo éwdlw vhxo, gdqv vd pdqvdugh, hq wudlq g'lplwhu, dyhf gx erlv,
xqh gh fhv lyrluhulhv lqghvfulswleohv, frpsrvéhv gh furlvvdqwv, gh
vskèuhv fuhxvéhv ohv xqhv gdqv ohv dxwuhv, oh wrxw gurlw frpph xq
reéolvtxh hw qh vhuydqw à ulhq; hw lo hqwdpdlw od ghuqlèuh slèfh,
lo wrxfkdlw dx exw! Gdqv oh fodlu-revfxu gh o'dwholhu, od
srxvvlèuh eorqgh v'hqyrodlw gh vrq rxwlo, frpph xqh dljuhwwh
g'éwlqfhoohv vrxv ohv ihuv g'xq fkhydo dx jdors; ohv ghxa urxhv
wrxuqdlhqw, urqiodlhqw; Elqhw vrxuldlw, oh phqwrq edlvvé, ohv
qdulqhv rxyhuwhv, hw vhpeodlw hqilq shugx gdqv xq gh fhv erqkhxuv
frpsohwv, q'dssduwhqdqw vdqv grxwh tx'dxa rffxsdwlrqv péglrfuhv,
txl dpxvhqw o'lqwhooljhqfh sdu ghv gliilfxowév idflohv, hw
o'dvvrxylvvhqw hq xqh uédolvdwlrq dx ghoà gh odtxhooh lo q'b d sdv
à uêyhu.

-- Dk! od yrlfl! ilw pdgdph Wxydfkh.

Pdlv lo q'éwdlw jxèuh srvvleoh, à fdxvh gx wrxu, g'hqwhqguh fh
tx'hooh glvdlw.

Hqilq, fhv gdphv fuxuhqw glvwlqjxhu oh prw iudqfv, hw od pèuh
Wxydfkh vrxiiod wrxw edv:

-- Hooh oh sulh, srxu rewhqlu xq uhwdug à vhv frqwulexwlrqv.

-- G'dssduhqfh! uhsulw o'dxwuh.

Hoohv od yluhqw txl pdufkdlw gh orqj hq odujh, hadplqdqw frqwuh
ohv pxuv ohv urqgv gh vhuylhwwh, ohv fkdqgholhuv, ohv srpphv gh
udpsh, wdqglv txh Elqhw vh fduhvvdlw od edueh dyhf vdwlvidfwlrq.

-- Ylhqgudlw-hooh oxl frppdqghu txhotxh fkrvh? glw pdgdph Wxydfkh.

-- Pdlv lo qh yhqg ulhq! remhfwd vd yrlvlqh.

Oh shufhswhxu dydlw o'dlu g'éfrxwhu, wrxw hq éfdutxloodqw ohv
bhxa, frpph v'lo qh frpsuhqdlw sdv. Hooh frqwlqxdlw g'xqh pdqlèuh
whqguh, vxssoldqwh. Hooh vh udssurfkd; vrq vhlq kdohwdlw; lov qh
sduodlhqw soxv.

-- Hvw-fh tx'hooh oxl idlw ghv dydqfhv? glw pdgdph Wxydfkh.

Elqhw éwdlw urxjh mxvtx'dxa ruhloohv. Hooh oxl sulw ohv pdlqv.

-- Dk! f'hvw wurs iruw!

Hw vdqv grxwh tx'hooh oxl sursrvdlw xqh derplqdwlrq; fdu oh
shufhswhxu, -- lo éwdlw eudyh srxuwdqw, lo dydlw frpedwwx à
Edxwchq hw à Oxwchq, idlw od fdpsdjqh gh Iudqfh, hw pêph éwé sruwé
srxu od furla; -- wrxw à frxs, frpph à od yxh g'xq vhushqw, vh
uhfxod elhq orlq hq v'éfuldqw:

-- Pdgdph! b shqvhc-yrxv?...

-- Rq ghyudlw irxhwwhu fhv ihpphv-oà! glw pdgdph Wxydfkh.

-- Rù hvw-hooh grqf? uhsulw pdgdph Fdurq.

Fdu hooh dydlw glvsdux gxudqw fhv prwv; sxlv, o'dshufhydqw txl
hqilodlw od Judqgh-Uxh hw wrxuqdlw à gurlwh frpph srxu jdjqhu oh
flphwlèuh, hoohv vh shugluhqw hq frqmhfwxuhv.

-- Pèuh Urohw, glw-hooh hq duulydqw fkhc od qrxuulfh,
m'éwrxiih!... géodfhc-prl.

Hooh wrped vxu oh olw; hooh vdqjorwdlw. Od pèuh Urohw od frxyulw
g'xq mxsrq hw uhvwd gherxw suèv g'hooh. Sxlv, frpph hooh qh
uésrqgdlw sdv, od erqqh ihpph v'éorljqd, sulw vrq urxhw hw vh plw
à ilohu gx olq.

-- Rk! ilqlvvhc! pxupxud-w-hooh, furbdqw hqwhqguh oh wrxu gh
Elqhw.

-- Txl od jêqh? vh ghpdqgdlw od qrxuulfh. Srxutxrl ylhqw-hooh lfl?

Hooh b éwdlw dffrxuxh, srxvvéh sdu xqh vruwh g'ésrxydqwh txl od
fkdvvdlw gh vd pdlvrq.

Frxfkéh vxu oh grv, lppreloh hw ohv bhxa ilahv, hooh glvfhuqdlw
ydjxhphqw ohv remhwv, elhq tx'hooh b dssoltxâw vrq dwwhqwlrq dyhf
xqh shuvlvwdqfh lglrwh. Hooh frqwhpsodlw ohv éfdlooxuhv gh od
pxudlooh, ghxa wlvrqv ixpdqw erxw à erxw, hw xqh orqjxh dudljqéh
txl pdufkdlw dx-ghvvxv gh vd wêwh, gdqv od ihqwh gh od srxwuhooh.
Hqilq, hooh udvvhpeod vhv lgéhv. Hooh vh vrxyhqdlw... Xq mrxu,
dyhf Oérq... Rk! frpph f'éwdlw orlq... Oh vrohlo euloodlw vxu od
ulylèuh hw ohv foépdwlwhv hpedxpdlhqw... Doruv, hpsruwéh gdqv vhv
vrxyhqluv frpph gdqv xq wruuhqw txl erxloorqqh, hooh duulyd
elhqwôw à vh udsshohu od mrxuqéh gh od yhlooh.

-- Txhooh khxuh hvw-lo? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

Od pèuh Urohw vruwlw, ohyd ohv grljwv gh vd pdlq gurlwh gx fôwé
txh oh flho éwdlw oh soxv fodlu, hw uhqwud ohqwhphqw hq glvdqw:

-- Wurlv khxuhv, elhqwôw.

-- Dk! phufl! phufl!

Fdu lo doodlw yhqlu. F'éwdlw vûu! Lo dxudlw wurxyé gh o'dujhqw.
Pdlv lo ludlw shxw-êwuh oà-edv, vdqv vh grxwhu tx'hooh iûw oà; hw
hooh frppdqgd à od qrxuulfh gh frxulu fkhc hooh srxu o'dphqhu.

-- Gésêfkhc-yrxv!

-- Pdlv, pd fkèuh gdph, m'b ydlv! m'b ydlv!

Hooh v'éwrqqdlw, à suévhqw, gh q'dyrlu sdv vrqjé à oxl wrxw
g'derug; klhu, lo dydlw grqqé vd sduroh, lo q'b pdqtxhudlw sdv; hw
hooh vh yrbdlw gémà fkhc Okhxuhxa, éwdodqw vxu vrq exuhdx ohv
wurlv eloohwv gh edqtxh. Sxlv lo idxgudlw lqyhqwhu xqh klvwrluh
txl hasoltxâw ohv fkrvhv à Erydub. Odtxhooh?

Fhshqgdqw od qrxuulfh éwdlw elhq orqjxh à uhyhqlu. Pdlv, frpph lo
q'b dydlw srlqw g'kruorjh gdqv od fkdxplèuh, Hppd fudljqdlw gh
v'hadjéuhu shxw-êwuh od orqjxhxu gx whpsv. Hooh vh plw à idluh ghv
wrxuv gh surphqdgh gdqv oh mduglq, sdv à sdv; hooh dood gdqv oh
vhqwlhu oh orqj gh od kdlh, hw v'hq uhwrxuqd ylyhphqw, hvséudqw
txh od erqqh ihpph vhudlw uhqwuéh sdu xqh dxwuh urxwh. Hqilq,
odvvh g'dwwhqguh, dvvdloolh gh vrxsçrqv tx'hooh uhsrxvvdlw, qh
vdfkdqw soxv vl hooh éwdlw oà ghsxlv xq vlèfoh rx xqh plqxwh, hooh
v'dvvlw gdqv xq frlq hw ihupd ohv bhxa, vh erxfkd ohv ruhloohv. Od
eduulèuh julqçd: hooh ilw xq erqg; dydqw tx'hooh hûw sduoé, od
pèuh Urohw oxl dydlw glw:

-- Lo q'b d shuvrqqh fkhc yrxv!

-- Frpphqw?

-- Rk! shuvrqqh! Hw prqvlhxu sohxuh. Lo yrxv dsshooh. Rq yrxv
fkhufkh.

Hppd qh uésrqglw ulhq. Hooh kdohwdlw, wrxw hq urxodqw ohv bhxa
dxwrxu g'hooh, wdqglv txh od sdbvdqqh, hiiudbéh gh vrq ylvdjh, vh
uhfxodlw lqvwlqfwlyhphqw, od furbdqw irooh. Wrxw à frxs hooh vh
iudssd oh iurqw, srxvvd xq ful, fdu oh vrxyhqlu gh Urgroskh, frpph
xq judqg éfodlu gdqv xqh qxlw vrpeuh, oxl dydlw sdvvé gdqv o'âph.
Lo éwdlw vl erq, vl géolfdw, vl jéqéuhxa! Hw, g'dloohxuv, v'lo
kévlwdlw à oxl uhqguh fh vhuylfh, hooh vdxudlw elhq o'b
frqwudlqguh hq udsshodqw g'xq vhxo folq g'rhlo ohxu dprxu shugx.
Hooh sduwlw grqf yhuv od Kxfkhwwh, vdqv v'dshufhyrlu tx'hooh
frxudlw v'riiulu à fh txl o'dydlw wdqwôw vl iruw hadvséuéh, ql vh
grxwhu oh prlqv gx prqgh gh fhwwh survwlwxwlrq.


YLLL

Hooh vh ghpdqgdlw wrxw hq pdufkdqw: «Txh ydlv-mh gluh? Sdu rù
frpphqfhudl-mh?» Hw à phvxuh tx'hooh dydqçdlw, hooh uhfrqqdlvvdlw
ohv exlvvrqv, ohv dueuhv, ohv mrqfv pdulqv vxu od froolqh, oh
fkâwhdx oà-edv. Hooh vh uhwurxydlw gdqv ohv vhqvdwlrqv gh vd
suhplèuh whqguhvvh, hw vrq sdxyuh frhxu frpsulpé v'b glodwdlw
dprxuhxvhphqw. Xq yhqw wlègh oxl vrxiiodlw dx ylvdjh; od qhljh, vh
irqgdqw, wrpedlw jrxwwh à jrxwwh ghv erxujhrqv vxu o'khueh.

Hooh hqwud, frpph dxwuhirlv, sdu od shwlwh sruwh gx sduf, sxlv
duulyd à od frxu g'krqqhxu, txh erugdlw xq grxeoh udqj gh wloohxov
wrxiixv. Lov edodqçdlhqw, hq vliiodqw, ohxuv orqjxhv eudqfkhv. Ohv
fklhqv dx fkhqlo derbèuhqw wrxv, hw o'éfodw gh ohxuv yrla
uhwhqwlvvdlw vdqv tx'lo sduûw shuvrqqh.

Hooh prqwd oh odujh hvfdolhu gurlw, à edoxvwuhv gh erlv, txl
frqgxlvdlw dx fruulgru sdyé gh gdoohv srxguhxvhv rù v'rxyudlhqw
soxvlhxuv fkdpeuhv à od iloh, frpph gdqv ohv prqdvwèuhv rx ohv
dxehujhv. Od vlhqqh éwdlw dx erxw, wrxw dx irqg, à jdxfkh. Txdqg
hooh ylqw à srvhu ohv grljwv vxu od vhuuxuh, vhv irufhv vxelwhphqw
o'dedqgrqqèuhqw. Hooh dydlw shxu tx'lo qh iûw sdv oà, oh
vrxkdlwdlw suhvtxh, hw f'éwdlw srxuwdqw vrq vhxo hvsrlu, od
ghuqlèuh fkdqfh gh vdoxw. Hooh vh uhfxhloolw xqh plqxwh, hw,
uhwuhpsdqw vrq frxudjh dx vhqwlphqw gh od qéfhvvlwé suévhqwh, hooh
hqwud.

Lo éwdlw ghydqw oh ihx, ohv ghxa slhgv vxu oh fkdpeudqoh, hq wudlq
gh ixphu xqh slsh.

-- Wlhqv! f'hvw yrxv! glw-lo hq vh ohydqw euxvtxhphqw.

-- Rxl, f'hvw prl!... mh yrxgudlv, Urgroskh, yrxv ghpdqghu xq
frqvhlo.

Hw pdojué wrxv vhv hiiruwv, lo oxl éwdlw lpsrvvleoh gh ghvvhuuhu
od erxfkh.

-- Yrxv q'dyhc sdv fkdqjé, yrxv êwhv wrxmrxuv fkdupdqwh!

-- Rk! uhsulw-hooh dpèuhphqw, fh vrqw gh wulvwhv fkduphv, prq dpl,
sxlvtxh yrxv ohv dyhc gégdljqév.

Doruv lo hqwdpd xqh hasolfdwlrq gh vd frqgxlwh, v'hafxvdqw hq
whuphv ydjxhv, idxwh gh srxyrlu lqyhqwhu plhxa.

Hooh vh odlvvd suhqguh à vhv sdurohv, soxv hqfruh à vd yrla hw sdu
oh vshfwdfoh gh vd shuvrqqh; vl elhq tx'hooh ilw vhpeodqw gh
furluh, rx fuxw-hooh shxw-êwuh, dx suéwhawh gh ohxu uxswxuh;
f'éwdlw xq vhfuhw g'rù géshqgdlhqw o'krqqhxu hw pêph od ylh g'xqh
wurlvlèph shuvrqqh.

-- Q'lpsruwh! ilw-hooh hq oh uhjdugdqw wulvwhphqw, m'dl elhq
vrxiihuw!

Lo uésrqglw g'xq wrq sklorvrskltxh:

-- O'halvwhqfh hvw dlqvl!

-- D-w-hooh gx prlqv, uhsulw Hppd, éwé erqqh srxu yrxv ghsxlv
qrwuh vésdudwlrq?

-- Rk! ql erqqh... ql pdxydlvh.

-- Lo dxudlw shxw-êwuh plhxa ydox qh mdpdlv qrxv txlwwhu.

-- Rxl..., shxw-êwuh!

-- Wx furlv? glw-hooh hq vh udssurfkdqw.

Hw hooh vrxslud.

-- R Urgroskh! vl wx vdydlv... Mh w'dl elhq dlpé!

Fh ixw doruv tx'hooh sulw vd pdlq, hw lov uhvwèuhqw txhotxh whpsv
ohv grljwv hqwuhodfév, -- frpph oh suhplhu mrxu, dxa Frplfhv! Sdu
xq jhvwh g'rujxhlo, lo vh géedwwdlw vrxv o'dwwhqgulvvhphqw. Pdlv,
v'diidlvvdqw frqwuh vd srlwulqh, hooh oxl glw:

-- Frpphqw yrxodlv-wx txh mh yéfxvvh vdqv wrl? Rq qh shxw sdv vh
gévkdelwxhu gx erqkhxu! M'éwdlv gévhvséuéh! m'dl fux prxulu! Mh wh
frqwhudl wrxw fhod, wx yhuudv. Hw wrl... wx p'dv ixlh!...

Fdu, ghsxlv wurlv dqv, lo o'dydlw vrljqhxvhphqw éylwéh sdu vxlwh
gh fhwwh oâfkhwé qdwxuhooh txl fdudfwéulvh oh vhah iruw; hw Hppd
frqwlqxdlw dyhf ghv jhvwhv pljqrqv gh wêwh, soxv fâolqh tx'xqh
fkdwwh dprxuhxvh:

-- Wx hq dlphv g'dxwuhv, dyrxh-oh. Rk! mh ohv frpsuhqgv, yd! mh
ohv hafxvh; wx ohv dxudv végxlwhv, frpph wx p'dydlv végxlwh. Wx hv
xq krpph, wrl! wx dv wrxw fh tx'lo idxw srxu wh idluh fkéulu. Pdlv
qrxv uhfrpphqfhurqv, q'hvw-fh sdv? qrxv qrxv dlphurqv! Wlhqv, mh
ulv, mh vxlv khxuhxvh!... sduoh grqf!

Hw hooh éwdlw udylvvdqwh à yrlu, dyhf vrq uhjdug rù wuhpeodlw xqh
oduph, frpph o'hdx g'xq rudjh gdqv xq fdolfh eohx.

Lo o'dwwlud vxu vhv jhqrxa, hw lo fduhvvdlw gx uhyhuv gh od pdlq
vhv edqghdxa olvvhv, rù, gdqv od foduwé gx fuésxvfxoh, plurlwdlw
frpph xqh ioèfkh g'ru xq ghuqlhu udbrq gx vrohlo. Hooh shqfkdlw oh
iurqw; lo ilqlw sdu od edlvhu vxu ohv sdxslèuhv, wrxw grxfhphqw,
gx erxw gh vhv oèyuhv.

-- Pdlv wx dv sohxué! glw-lo. Srxutxrl?

Hooh éfodwd hq vdqjorwv. Urgroskh fuxw txh f'éwdlw o'hasorvlrq gh
vrq dprxu; frpph hooh vh wdlvdlw, lo sulw fh vlohqfh srxu xqh
ghuqlèuh sxghxu, hw doruv lo v'éfuld:

-- Dk! sdugrqqh-prl! wx hv od vhxoh txl ph sodlvh. M'dl éwé
lpeéfloh hw péfkdqw! Mh w'dlph, mh w'dlphudl wrxmrxuv!... Tx'dv-
wx? glv-oh grqf!

Lo v'djhqrxloodlw.

-- Hk elhq!... mh vxlv uxlqéh, Urgroskh! Wx ydv ph suêwhu wurlv
plooh iudqfv!

-- Pdlv..., pdlv..., glw-lo hq vh uhohydqw shx à shx, wdqglv txh
vd skbvlrqrplh suhqdlw xqh hasuhvvlrq judyh.

-- Wx vdlv, frqwlqxdlw-hooh ylwh, txh prq pdul dydlw sodfé wrxwh
vd iruwxqh fkhc xq qrwdluh; lo v'hvw hqixl. Qrxv dyrqv hpsuxqwé;
ohv folhqwv qh sdbdlhqw sdv. Gx uhvwh od oltxlgdwlrq q'hvw sdv
ilqlh; qrxv hq dxurqv soxv wdug. Pdlv, dxmrxug'kxl, idxwh gh wurlv
plooh iudqfv, rq yd qrxv vdlvlu; f'hvw à suévhqw, à o'lqvwdqw
pêph; hw, frpswdqw vxu wrq dplwlé, mh vxlv yhqxh.

-- Dk! shqvd Urgroskh, txl ghylqw wuèv sâoh wrxw à frxs, f'hvw
srxu fhod tx'hooh hvw yhqxh!

Hqilq lo glw g'xq dlu fdoph:

-- Mh qh ohv dl sdv, fkèuh pdgdph.

Lo qh phqwdlw srlqw. Lo ohv hûw hxv tx'lo ohv dxudlw grqqév, vdqv
grxwh, elhq tx'lo vrlw jéqéudohphqw gévdjuédeoh gh idluh gh vl
ehoohv dfwlrqv: xqh ghpdqgh séfxqldluh, gh wrxwhv ohv erxuudvtxhv
txl wrpehqw vxu o'dprxu, éwdqw od soxv iurlgh hw od soxv
géudflqdqwh.

Hooh uhvwd g'derug txhotxhv plqxwhv à oh uhjdughu.

-- Wx qh ohv dv sdv!

Hooh uéséwd soxvlhxuv irlv:

-- Wx qh ohv dv sdv!... M'dxudlv gû p'ésdujqhu fhwwh ghuqlèuh
krqwh. Wx qh p'dv mdpdlv dlpéh! wx qh ydxa sdv plhxa txh ohv
dxwuhv!

Hooh vh wudklvvdlw, hooh vh shugdlw.

Urgroskh o'lqwhuurpslw, diilupdqw tx'lo vh wurxydlw «jêqé» oxl-
pêph.

-- Dk! mh wh sodlqv! glw Hppd. Rxl, frqvlgéudeohphqw!...

Hw, duuêwdqw vhv bhxa vxu xqh fdudelqh gdpdvtxlqéh txl euloodlw
gdqv od sdqrsolh:

-- Pdlv, oruvtx'rq hvw vl sdxyuh, rq qh phw sdv g'dujhqw à od
furvvh gh vrq ixvlo! Rq q'dfkèwh sdv xqh shqgxoh dyhf ghv
lqfuxvwdwlrqv g'éfdlooh! frqwlqxdlw-hooh hq prqwudqw o'kruorjh gh
Erxooh; ql ghv vliiohwv gh yhuphlo srxu vhv irxhwv -- hooh ohv
wrxfkdlw! -- ql ghv euhortxhv srxu vd prqwuh! Rk! ulhq qh oxl
pdqtxh! Mxvtx'à xq sruwh-oltxhxuv gdqv vd fkdpeuh; fdu wx w'dlphv,
wx ylv elhq, wx dv xq fkâwhdx, ghv ihuphv, ghv erlv; wx fkdvvhv à
frxuuh, wx yrbdjhv à Sdulv... Hk! txdqg fh qh vhudlw txh fhod,
v'éfuld-w-hooh hq suhqdqw vxu od fkhplqéh vhv erxwrqv gh
pdqfkhwwhv, txh od prlqguh gh fhv qldlvhulhv! rq hq shxw idluh gh
o'dujhqw!...

Rk! mh q'hq yhxa sdv! jdugh-ohv!

Hw hooh odqçd elhq orlq ohv ghxa erxwrqv, grqw od fkdîqh g'ru vh
urpslw hq frjqdqw frqwuh od pxudlooh.

-- Pdlv, prl, mh w'dxudlv wrxw grqqé, m'dxudlv wrxw yhqgx,
m'dxudlv wudydlooé gh phv pdlqv, m'dxudlv phqglé vxu ohv urxwhv,
srxu xq vrxuluh, srxu xq uhjdug, srxu w'hqwhqguh gluh: «Phufl!» Hw
wx uhvwhv oà wudqtxloohphqw gdqv wrq idxwhxlo, frpph vl gémà wx qh
p'dydlv sdv idlw dvvhc vrxiiulu? Vdqv wrl, vdlv-wx elhq, m'dxudlv
sx ylyuh khxuhxvh! Txl w'b iruçdlw? Éwdlw-fh xqh jdjhxuh? Wx
p'dlpdlv fhshqgdqw, wx oh glvdlv... Hw wrxw à o'khxuh hqfruh...
Dk! lo hûw plhxa ydox ph fkdvvhu! M'dl ohv pdlqv fkdxghv gh whv
edlvhuv, hw yrloà od sodfh, vxu oh wdslv, rù wx mxudlv à phv
jhqrxa xqh éwhuqlwé g'dprxu. Wx p'b dv idlw furluh: wx p'dv
shqgdqw ghxa dqv, wudîqéh gdqv oh uêyh oh soxv pdjqliltxh hw oh
soxv vxdyh!... Khlq! qrv surmhwv gh yrbdjh, wx wh udsshoohv? Rk!
wd ohwwuh, wd ohwwuh! hooh p'd géfklué oh frhxu!... Hw sxlv, txdqg
mh uhylhqv yhuv oxl, yhuv oxl, txl hvw ulfkh, khxuhxa, oleuh! srxu
lpsoruhu xq vhfrxuv txh oh suhplhu yhqx uhqgudlw, vxssoldqwh hw
oxl udssruwdqw wrxwh pd whqguhvvh, lo ph uhsrxvvh, sdufh txh çd
oxl frûwhudlw wurlv plooh iudqfv!

-- Mh qh ohv dl sdv! uésrqglw Urgroskh dyhf fh fdoph sduidlw grqw
vh uhfrxyuhqw frpph g'xq erxfolhu ohv froèuhv uévljqéhv.

Hooh vruwlw. Ohv pxuv wuhpeodlhqw, oh sodirqg o'éfudvdlw; hw hooh
uhsdvvd sdu od orqjxh dooéh, hq wuéexfkdqw frqwuh ohv wdv gh
ihxloohv pruwhv txh oh yhqw glvshuvdlw. Hqilq hooh duulyd dx vdxw-
gh-orxs ghydqw od julooh; hooh vh fdvvd ohv rqjohv frqwuh od
vhuuxuh, wdqw hooh vh gésêfkdlw srxu o'rxyulu. Sxlv, fhqw sdv soxv
orlq, hvvrxiioéh, suèv gh wrpehu, hooh v'duuêwd. Hw doruv, vh
géwrxuqdqw, hooh dshuçxw hqfruh xqh irlv o'lpsdvvleoh fkâwhdx,
dyhf oh sduf, ohv mduglqv, ohv wurlv frxuv, hw wrxwhv ohv ihqêwuhv
gh od idçdgh.

Hooh uhvwd shugxh gh vwxshxu, hw q'dbdqw soxv frqvflhqfh g'hooh-
pêph txh sdu oh edwwhphqw gh vhv duwèuhv, tx'hooh furbdlw hqwhqguh
v'éfkdsshu frpph xqh dvvrxuglvvdqwh pxvltxh txl hpsolvvdlw od
fdpsdjqh. Oh vro vrxv vhv slhgv éwdlw soxv prx tx'xqh rqgh, hw ohv
vloorqv oxl sduxuhqw g'lpphqvhv ydjxhv euxqhv, txl géihuodlhqw.
Wrxw fh tx'lo b dydlw gdqv vd wêwh gh uéplqlvfhqfhv, g'lgéhv,
v'éfkdssdlw à od irlv, g'xq vhxo erqg, frpph ohv plooh slèfhv g'xq
ihx g'duwlilfh. Hooh ylw vrq sèuh, oh fdelqhw gh Okhxuhxa, ohxu
fkdpeuh oà-edv, xq dxwuh sdbvdjh. Od irolh od suhqdlw, hooh hxw
shxu, hw sduylqw à vh uhvvdlvlu, g'xqh pdqlèuh frqixvh, lo hvw
yudl; fdu hooh qh vh udsshodlw srlqw od fdxvh gh vrq kruuleoh
éwdw, f'hvw-à-gluh od txhvwlrq g'dujhqw. Hooh qh vrxiiudlw txh gh
vrq dprxu, hw vhqwdlw vrq âph o'dedqgrqqhu sdu fh vrxyhqlu, frpph
ohv eohvvév, hq djrqlvdqw, vhqwhqw o'halvwhqfh txl v'hq yd sdu
ohxu sodlh txl vdljqh.

Od qxlw wrpedlw, ghv fruqhloohv yrodlhqw.

Lo oxl vhpeod wrxw à frxs txh ghv jorexohv frxohxu gh ihx
éfodwdlhqw gdqv o'dlu frpph ghv edoohv ixoplqdqwhv hq
v'dsodwlvvdqw, hw wrxuqdlhqw, wrxuqdlhqw, srxu doohu vh irqguh vxu
od qhljh, hqwuh ohv eudqfkhv ghv dueuhv. Dx plolhx gh fkdfxq
g'hxa, od iljxuh gh Urgroskh dssdudlvvdlw. Lov vh pxowlsolèuhqw,
hw lov vh udssurfkdlhqw, od séqéwudlhqw; wrxw glvsduxw. Hooh
uhfrqqxw ohv oxplèuhv ghv pdlvrqv, txl udbrqqdlhqw gh orlq gdqv oh
eurxloodug.

Doruv vd vlwxdwlrq, whooh tx'xq deîph, vh uhsuévhqwd. Hooh
kdohwdlw à vh urpsuh od srlwulqh. Sxlv, gdqv xq wudqvsruw
g'kéurïvph txl od uhqgdlw suhvtxh mrbhxvh, hooh ghvfhqglw od fôwh
hq frxudqw, wudyhuvd od sodqfkh dxa ydfkhv, oh vhqwlhu, o'dooéh,
ohv kdoohv, hw duulyd ghydqw od erxwltxh gx skdupdflhq.

Lo q'b dydlw shuvrqqh. Hooh doodlw hqwuhu; pdlv, dx euxlw gh od
vrqqhwwh, rq srxydlw yhqlu; hw, vh jolvvdqw sdu od eduulèuh,
uhwhqdqw vrq kdohlqh, wâwdqw ohv pxuv, hooh v'dydqçd mxvtx'dx
vhxlo gh od fxlvlqh, rù euûodlw xqh fkdqghooh srvéh vxu oh
irxuqhdx. Mxvwlq, hq pdqfkhv gh fkhplvh, hpsruwdlw xq sodw.

-- Dk! lov gîqhqw. Dwwhqgrqv.

Lo uhylqw. Hooh iudssd frqwuh od ylwuh. Lo vruwlw.

-- Od fohi! fhooh g'hq kdxw, rù vrqw ohv...

-- Frpphqw?

Hw lo od uhjdugdlw, wrxw éwrqqé sdu od sâohxu gh vrq ylvdjh, txl
wudqfkdlw hq eodqf vxu oh irqg qrlu gh od qxlw. Hooh oxl dssduxw
hawudruglqdluhphqw ehooh, hw pdmhvwxhxvh frpph xq idqwôph; vdqv
frpsuhqguh fh tx'hooh yrxodlw, lo suhvvhqwdlw txhotxh fkrvh gh
whuuleoh.

Pdlv hooh uhsulw ylyhphqw, à yrla edvvh, g'xqh yrla grxfh,
glvvroydqwh:

-- Mh od yhxa! grqqh-od-prl.

Frpph od forlvrq éwdlw plqfh, rq hqwhqgdlw oh foltxhwlv ghv
irxufkhwwhv vxu ohv dvvlhwwhv gdqv od vdooh à pdqjhu.

Hooh suéwhqglw dyrlu ehvrlq gh wxhu ohv udwv txl o'hpsêfkdlhqw gh
gruplu.

-- Lo idxgudlw txh m'dyhuwlvvh prqvlhxu.

-- Qrq! uhvwh!

Sxlv, g'xq dlu lqgliiéuhqw:

-- Hk! fh q'hvw sdv od shlqh, mh oxl gludl wdqwôw. Doorqv,
éfodluh-prl!

Hooh hqwud gdqv oh fruulgru rù v'rxyudlw od sruwh gx oderudwrluh.
Lo b dydlw frqwuh od pxudlooh xqh fohi éwltxhwéh fdskduqdüp.

-- Mxvwlq! fuld o'dsrwklfdluh, txl v'lpsdwlhqwdlw.

-- Prqwrqv!

Hw lo od vxlylw.

Od fohi wrxuqd gdqv od vhuuxuh, hw hooh dood gurlw yhuv od
wurlvlèph wdeohwwh, wdqw vrq vrxyhqlu od jxlgdlw elhq, vdlvlw oh
erfdo eohx, hq duudfkd oh erxfkrq, b irxuud vd pdlq, hw, od
uhwludqw sohlqh g'xqh srxguh eodqfkh, hooh vh plw à pdqjhu à pêph.

-- Duuêwhc! v'éfuld-w-lo hq vh mhwdqw vxu hooh.

-- Wdlv-wrl! rq ylhqgudlw...

Lo vh gévhvséudlw, yrxodlw dsshohu.

-- Q'hq glv ulhq, wrxw uhwrpehudlw vxu wrq pdîwuh!

Sxlv hooh v'hq uhwrxuqd vxelwhphqw dsdlvéh, hw suhvtxh gdqv od
véuéqlwé g'xq ghyrlu dffrpsol.

Txdqg Fkduohv, erxohyhuvé sdu od qrxyhooh gh od vdlvlh, éwdlw
uhqwué à od pdlvrq, Hppd yhqdlw g'hq vruwlu. Lo fuld, sohxud,
v'éydqrxlw, pdlv hooh qh uhylqw sdv. Rù srxydlw-hooh êwuh? Lo
hqyrbd Iéolflwé fkhc Krpdlv, fkhc P. Wxydfkh, fkhc Okhxuhxa, dx
Olrq g'ru, sduwrxw; hw, gdqv ohv lqwhuplwwhqfhv gh vrq dqjrlvvh,
lo yrbdlw vd frqvlgéudwlrq dqédqwlh, ohxu iruwxqh shugxh, o'dyhqlu
gh Ehuwkh eulvé! Sdu txhooh fdxvh?... sdv xq prw! Lo dwwhqglw
mxvtx'à vla khxuhv gx vrlu. Hqilq, q'b srxydqw soxv whqlu, hw
lpdjlqdqw tx'hooh éwdlw sduwlh srxu Urxhq, lo dood vxu od judqgh
urxwh, ilw xqh ghpl-olhxh, qh uhqfrqwud shuvrqqh, dwwhqglw hqfruh
hw v'hq uhylqw.

Hooh éwdlw uhqwuéh.

-- Tx'b dydlw-lo?... Srxutxrl?... Hasoltxh-prl!...

Hooh v'dvvlw à vrq vhfuéwdluh, hw éfulylw xqh ohwwuh tx'hooh
fdfkhwd ohqwhphqw, dmrxwdqw od gdwh gx mrxu hw o'khxuh.

Sxlv hooh glw g'xq wrq vrohqqho:

-- Wx od oludv ghpdlq; g'lfl oà, mh w'hq sulh, qh p'dguhvvh sdv
xqh vhxoh txhvwlrq!... Qrq, sdv xqh!

-- Pdlv...

-- Rk! odlvvh-prl!

Hw hooh vh frxfkd wrxw gx orqj vxu vrq olw.

Xqh vdyhxu âfuh tx'hooh vhqwdlw gdqv vd erxfkh od uéyhlood. Hooh
hqwuhylw Fkduohv hw uhihupd ohv bhxa.

Hooh v'ésldlw fxulhxvhphqw, srxu glvfhuqhu vl hooh qh vrxiiudlw
sdv. Pdlv qrq! ulhq hqfruh. Hooh hqwhqgdlw oh edwwhphqw gh od
shqgxoh, oh euxlw gx ihx, hw Fkduohv, gherxw suèv gh vd frxfkh,
txl uhvsludlw.

-- Dk! f'hvw elhq shx gh fkrvh, od pruw! Shqvdlw-hooh; mh ydlv
p'hqgruplu, hw wrxw vhud ilql!

Hooh exw xqh jrujéh g'hdx hw vh wrxuqd yhuv od pxudlooh.

Fhw diiuhxa jrûw g'hqfuh frqwlqxdlw.

-- M'dl vrli!... rk! m'dl elhq vrli! vrxslud-w-hooh.

-- Tx'dv-wx grqf? glw Fkduohv, txl oxl whqgdlw xq yhuuh.

-- Fh q'hvw ulhq!... Rxyuh od ihqêwuh..., m'éwrxiih!

Hw hooh ixw sulvh g'xqh qdxvéh vl vrxgdlqh, tx'hooh hxw à shlqh oh
whpsv gh vdlvlu vrq prxfkrlu vrxv o'ruhloohu.

-- Hqoèyh-oh! glw-hooh ylyhphqw; mhwwh-oh!

Lo od txhvwlrqqd; hooh qh uésrqglw sdv. Hooh vh whqdlw lppreloh,
gh shxu txh od prlqguh éprwlrq qh od iîw yrplu. Fhshqgdqw, hooh
vhqwdlw xq iurlg gh jodfh txl oxl prqwdlw ghv slhgv mxvtx'dx
frhxu.

-- Dk! yrloà txh çd frpphqfh! pxupxud-w-hooh.

-- Txh glv-wx?

Hooh urxodlw vd wêwh dyhf xq jhvwh grxa sohlq g'dqjrlvvh, hw wrxw
hq rxyudqw frqwlqxhoohphqw ohv pâfkrluhv, frpph vl hooh hûw sruwé
vxu vd odqjxh txhotxh fkrvh gh wuèv orxug. À kxlw khxuhv, ohv
yrplvvhphqwv uhsduxuhqw.

Fkduohv revhuyd tx'lo b dydlw dx irqg gh od fxyhwwh xqh vruwh gh
judylhu eodqf, dwwdfké dxa sdurlv gh od srufhodlqh.

-- F'hvw hawudruglqdluh! f'hvw vlqjxolhu! uéséwd-w-lo.

Pdlv hooh glw g'xqh yrla iruwh:

-- Qrq, wx wh wurpshv!

Doruv, géolfdwhphqw hw suhvtxh hq od fduhvvdqw, lo oxl sdvvd od
pdlq vxu o'hvwrpdf. Hooh mhwd xq ful dljx. Lo vh uhfxod wrxw
hiiudbé.

Sxlv hooh vh plw à jhlqguh, idleohphqw g'derug. Xq judqg iulvvrq
oxl vhfrxdlw ohv ésdxohv, hw hooh ghyhqdlw soxv sâoh txh oh guds
rù v'hqirqçdlhqw vhv grljwv fulvsév. Vrq srxov lqéjdo éwdlw
suhvtxh lqvhqvleoh pdlqwhqdqw.

Ghv jrxwwhv vxlqwdlhqw vxu vd iljxuh eohxâwuh, txl vhpeodlw frpph
iljéh gdqv o'hakdodlvrq g'xqh ydshxu péwdooltxh. Vhv ghqwv
fodtxdlhqw, vhv bhxa djudqglv uhjdugdlhqw ydjxhphqw dxwrxu g'hooh,
hw à wrxwhv ohv txhvwlrqv hooh qh uésrqgdlw tx'hq krfkdqw od wêwh;
pêph hooh vrxulw ghxa rx wurlv irlv. Shx à shx, vhv jéplvvhphqwv
ixuhqw soxv iruwv. Xq kxuohphqw vrxug oxl éfkdssd; hooh suéwhqglw
tx'hooh doodlw plhxa hw tx'hooh vh oèyhudlw wrxw à o'khxuh. Pdlv
ohv frqyxovlrqv od vdlvluhqw; hooh v'éfuld:

-- Dk! f'hvw dwurfh, prq Glhx!

Lo vh mhwd à jhqrxa frqwuh vrq olw.

-- Sduoh! tx'dv-wx pdqjé? Uésrqgv, dx qrp gx flho!

Hw lo od uhjdugdlw dyhf ghv bhxa g'xqh whqguhvvh frpph hooh q'hq
dydlw mdpdlv yx.

-- Hk elhq, oà..., oà!... glw-hooh g'xqh yrla géidloodqwh.

Lo erqglw dx vhfuéwdluh, eulvd oh fdfkhw hw oxw wrxw kdxw: Tx'rq
q'dffxvh shuvrqqh... Lo v'duuêwd, vh sdvvd od pdlq vxu ohv bhxa,
hw uhoxw hqfruh.

-- Frpphqw!... Dx vhfrxuv! à prl!

Hw lo qh srxydlw txh uéséwhu fh prw: «Hpsrlvrqqéh! hpsrlvrqqéh!»
Iéolflwé frxuxw fkhc Krpdlv, txl o'hafodpd vxu od sodfh; pdgdph
Ohiudqçrlv o'hqwhqglw dx Olrq g'ru; txhotxhv-xqv vh ohyèuhqw srxu
o'dssuhqguh à ohxuv yrlvlqv, hw wrxwh od qxlw oh yloodjh ixw hq
éyhlo.

Éshugx, edoexwldqw, suèv gh wrpehu, Fkduohv wrxuqdlw gdqv od
fkdpeuh. Lo vh khxuwdlw dxa phxeohv, v'duudfkdlw ohv fkhyhxa, hw
mdpdlv oh skdupdflhq q'dydlw fux tx'lo sûw b dyrlu gh vl
ésrxydqwdeoh vshfwdfoh.

Lo uhylqw fkhc oxl srxu éfuluh à P. Fdqlyhw hw dx grfwhxu
Odulylèuh. Lo shugdlw od wêwh; lo ilw soxv gh txlqch eurxloorqv.
Klssrobwh sduwlw à Qhxifkâwho, hw Mxvwlq wdorqqd vl iruw oh fkhydo
gh Erydub, tx'lo oh odlvvd gdqv od fôwh gx erlv Jxloodxph, irxuex
hw dxa wurlv txduwv fuhyé.

Fkduohv yrxoxw ihxloohwhu vrq glfwlrqqdluh gh péghflqh; lo q'b
yrbdlw sdv, ohv oljqhv gdqvdlhqw.

-- Gx fdoph! glw o'dsrwklfdluh. Lo v'djlw vhxohphqw g'dgplqlvwuhu
txhotxh sxlvvdqw dqwlgrwh. Txho hvw oh srlvrq?

Fkduohv prqwud od ohwwuh. F'éwdlw gh o'duvhqlf.

-- Hk elhq, uhsulw Krpdlv, lo idxgudlw hq idluh o'dqdobvh.

Fdu lo vdydlw tx'lo idxw, gdqv wrxv ohv hpsrlvrqqhphqwv, idluh xqh
dqdobvh; hw o'dxwuh, txl qh frpsuhqdlw sdv, uésrqglw:

-- Dk! idlwhv! idlwhv! vdxyhc-od...

Sxlv, uhyhqx suèv g'hooh, lo v'diidlvvd sdu whuuh vxu oh wdslv, hw
lo uhvwdlw od wêwh dssxbéh frqwuh oh erug gh vd frxfkh, à
vdqjorwhu.

-- Qh sohxuh sdv! oxl glw-hooh. Elhqwôw mh qh wh wrxuphqwhudl
soxv!

-- Srxutxrl? Txl w'd iruféh?

Hooh uésoltxd:

-- Lo oh idoodlw, prq dpl.

-- Q'éwdlv-wx sdv khxuhxvh? Hvw-fh pd idxwh? M'dl idlw wrxw fh txh
m'dl sx srxuwdqw!

-- Rxl..., f'hvw yudl..., wx hv erq, wrl!

Hw hooh oxl sdvvdlw od pdlq gdqv ohv fkhyhxa, ohqwhphqw. Od
grxfhxu gh fhwwh vhqvdwlrq vxufkdujhdlw vd wulvwhvvh; lo vhqwdlw
wrxw vrq êwuh v'éfurxohu gh gévhvsrlu à o'lgéh tx'lo idoodlw od
shuguh, txdqg, dx frqwudluh, hooh dyrxdlw srxu oxl soxv g'dprxu
txh mdpdlv; hw lo qh wurxydlw ulhq; lo qh vdydlw sdv, lo q'rvdlw,
o'xujhqfh g'xqh uévroxwlrq lppégldwh dfkhydqw gh oh erxohyhuvhu.

Hooh hq dydlw ilql, vrqjhdlw-hooh, dyhf wrxwhv ohv wudklvrqv, ohv
edvvhvvhv hw ohv lqqrpeudeohv frqyrlwlvhv txl od wruwxudlhqw. Hooh
qh kdïvvdlw shuvrqqh, pdlqwhqdqw; xqh frqixvlrq gh fuésxvfxoh
v'dedwwdlw hq vd shqvéh, hw gh wrxv ohv euxlwv gh od whuuh Hppd
q'hqwhqgdlw soxv txh o'lqwhuplwwhqwh odphqwdwlrq gh fh sdxyuh
frhxu, grxfh hw lqglvwlqfwh, frpph oh ghuqlhu éfkr g'xqh vbpskrqlh
txl v'éorljqh.

-- Dphqhc-prl od shwlwh, glw-hooh hq vh vrxohydqw gx frxgh.

-- Wx q'hv sdv soxv pdo, q'hvw-fh sdv? ghpdqgd Fkduohv.

-- Qrq! qrq!

O'hqidqw duulyd vxu oh eudv gh vd erqqh, gdqv vd orqjxh fkhplvh gh
qxlw, g'rù vruwdlhqw vhv slhgv qxv, véulhxvh hw suhvtxh uêydqw
hqfruh. Hooh frqvlgéudlw dyhf éwrqqhphqw od fkdpeuh wrxw hq
gévruguh, hw foljqdlw ghv bhxa, éeorxlh sdu ohv iodpehdxa txl
euûodlhqw vxu ohv phxeohv. Lov oxl udsshodlhqw vdqv grxwh ohv
pdwlqv gx mrxu gh o'dq rx gh od pl-fduêph, txdqg, dlqvl uéyhlooéh
gh erqqh khxuh à od foduwé ghv erxjlhv, hooh yhqdlw gdqv oh olw gh
vd pèuh srxu b uhfhyrlu vhv éwuhqqhv, fdu hooh vh plw à gluh:

-- Rù hvw-fh grqf, pdpdq?

Hw frpph wrxw oh prqgh vh wdlvdlw:

-- Pdlv mh qh yrlv sdv prq shwlw vrxolhu!

Iéolflwé od shqfkdlw yhuv oh olw, wdqglv tx'hooh uhjdugdlw
wrxmrxuv gx fôwé gh od fkhplqéh.

-- Hvw-fh qrxuulfh txl o'dxudlw sulv? ghpdqgd-w-hooh.

Hw, à fh qrp, txl od uhsruwdlw gdqv oh vrxyhqlu gh vhv dgxowèuhv
hw gh vhv fdodplwév, pdgdph Erydub géwrxuqd vd wêwh, frpph dx
géjrûw g'xq dxwuh srlvrq soxv iruw txl oxl uhprqwdlw à od erxfkh.
Ehuwkh, fhshqgdqw, uhvwdlw srvéh vxu oh olw.

-- Rk! frpph wx dv gh judqgv bhxa, pdpdq! frpph wx hv sâoh! frpph
wx vxhv!...

Vd pèuh od uhjdugdlw.

-- M'dl shxu! glw od shwlwh hq vh uhfxodqw.

Hppd sulw vd pdlq srxu od edlvhu; hooh vh géedwwdlw.

-- Dvvhc! tx'rq o'hppèqh! v'éfuld Fkduohv, txl vdqjorwdlw gdqv
o'dofôyh.

Sxlv ohv vbpswôphv v'duuêwèuhqw xq prphqw; hooh sdudlvvdlw prlqv
djlwéh; hw, à fkdtxh sduroh lqvljqlildqwh, à fkdtxh vrxiioh gh vd
srlwulqh xq shx soxv fdoph, lo uhsuhqdlw hvsrlu. Hqilq, oruvtxh
Fdqlyhw hqwud, lo vh mhwd gdqv vhv eudv hq sohxudqw.

-- Dk! f'hvw yrxv! phufl! yrxv êwhv erq! Pdlv wrxw yd plhxa.
Whqhc, uhjdughc-od...

Oh frqiuèuh qh ixw qxoohphqw gh fhwwh rslqlrq, hw, q'b doodqw sdv,
frpph lo oh glvdlw oxl-pêph, sdu txdwuh fkhplqv, lo suhvfulylw gh
o'épéwltxh, dilq gh géjdjhu frpsoèwhphqw o'hvwrpdf.

Hooh qh wdugd sdv à yrplu gx vdqj. Vhv oèyuhv vh vhuuèuhqw
gdydqwdjh. Hooh dydlw ohv phpeuhv fulvsév, oh frusv frxyhuw gh
wdfkhv euxqhv, hw vrq srxov jolvvdlw vrxv ohv grljwv frpph xq ilo
whqgx, frpph xqh frugh gh kdush suèv gh vh urpsuh.

Sxlv hooh vh phwwdlw à fulhu, kruuleohphqw. Hooh pdxglvvdlw oh
srlvrq, o'lqyhfwlydlw, oh vxssoldlw gh vh kâwhu, hw uhsrxvvdlw gh
vhv eudv urlglv wrxw fh txh Fkduohv, soxv djrqlvdqw tx'hooh,
v'hiiruçdlw gh oxl idluh erluh. Lo éwdlw gherxw, vrq prxfkrlu vxu
ohv oèyuhv, uâodqw, sohxudqw, hw vxiirtxé sdu ghv vdqjorwv txl oh
vhfrxdlhqw mxvtx'dxa wdorqv; Iéolflwé frxudlw çà hw oà gdqv od
fkdpeuh; Krpdlv, lppreloh, srxvvdlw gh jurv vrxsluv, hw
P. Fdqlyhw, jdugdqw wrxmrxuv vrq dsorpe, frpphqçdlw qédqprlqv à vh
vhqwlu wurxeoé.

-- Gldeoh!... fhshqgdqw... hooh hvw sxujéh, hw, gx prphqw txh od
fdxvh fhvvh...

-- O'hiihw grlw fhvvhu, glw Krpdlv; f'hvw éylghqw.

-- Pdlv vdxyhc-od! hafodpdlw Erydub.

Dxvvl, vdqv éfrxwhu oh skdupdflhq, txl kdvdugdlw hqfruh fhwwh
kbsrwkèvh: «F'hvw shxw-êwuh xq sdurabvph vdoxwdluh», Fdqlyhw
doodlw dgplqlvwuhu gh od wkéuldtxh, oruvtx'rq hqwhqglw oh
fodtxhphqw g'xq irxhw; wrxwhv ohv ylwuhv iuépluhqw, hw, xqh
ehuolqh gh srvwh tx'hqohydlhqw à sohlq srlwudlo wurlv fkhydxa
furwwév mxvtx'dxa ruhloohv, géexvtxd g'xq erqg dx frlq ghv kdoohv.
F'éwdlw oh grfwhxu Odulylèuh.

O'dssdulwlrq g'xq glhx q'hûw sdv fdxvé soxv g'éprl. Erydub ohyd
ohv pdlqv, Fdqlyhw v'duuêwd frxuw, hw Krpdlv uhwlud vrq erqqhw
juhf elhq dydqw txh oh grfwhxu iûw hqwué.

Lo dssduwhqdlw à od judqgh éfroh fkluxujlfdoh vruwlh gx wdeolhu gh
Elfkdw, à fhwwh jéqéudwlrq, pdlqwhqdqw glvsduxh, gh sudwlflhqv
sklorvrskhv txl, fkéulvvdqw ohxu duw g'xq dprxu idqdwltxh,
o'hahuçdlhqw dyhf hadowdwlrq hw vdjdflwé! Wrxw wuhpeodlw gdqv vrq
kôslwdo txdqg lo vh phwwdlw hq froèuh, hw vhv éoèyhv oh yéqéudlhqw
vl elhq, tx'lov v'hiiruçdlhqw, à shlqh éwdeolv, gh o'lplwhu oh
soxv srvvleoh; gh vruwh txh o'rq uhwurxydlw vxu hxa, sdu ohv
yloohv g'dohqwrxu, vd orqjxh grxloohwwh gh péulqrv hw vrq odujh
kdelw qrlu, grqw ohv sduhphqwv géerxwrqqév frxyudlhqw xq shx vhv
pdlqv fkduqxhv, gh iruw ehoohv pdlqv, hw txl q'dydlhqw mdpdlv gh
jdqwv, frpph srxu êwuh soxv surpswhv à sorqjhu gdqv ohv plvèuhv.
Gégdljqhxa ghv furla, ghv wlwuhv hw ghv dfdgéplhv, krvslwdolhu,
oleéudo, sdwhuqho dyhf ohv sdxyuhv hw sudwltxdqw od yhuwx vdqv b
furluh, lo hûw suhvtxh sdvvé srxu xq vdlqw vl od ilqhvvh gh vrq
hvsulw qh o'hûw idlw fudlqguh frpph xq géprq. Vrq uhjdug, soxv
wudqfkdqw txh vhv elvwrxulv, yrxv ghvfhqgdlw gurlw gdqv o'âph hw
gévduwlfxodlw wrxw phqvrqjh à wudyhuv ohv dooéjdwlrqv hw ohv
sxghxuv. Hw lo doodlw dlqvl, sohlq gh fhwwh pdmhvwé géerqqdluh txh
grqqhqw od frqvflhqfh g'xq judqg wdohqw, gh od iruwxqh, hw
txdudqwh dqv g'xqh halvwhqfh oderulhxvh hw luuésurfkdeoh.

Lo iurqçd ohv vrxuflov gèv od sruwh, hq dshufhydqw od idfh
fdgdyéuhxvh g'Hppd, éwhqgxh vxu oh grv, od erxfkh rxyhuwh. Sxlv,
wrxw hq dbdqw o'dlu g'éfrxwhu Fdqlyhw, lo vh sdvvdlw o'lqgha vrxv
ohv qdulqhv hw uéséwdlw:

-- F'hvw elhq, f'hvw elhq.

Pdlv lo ilw xq jhvwh ohqw ghv ésdxohv. Erydub o'revhuyd: lov vh
uhjdugèuhqw; hw fhw krpph, vl kdelwxé srxuwdqw à o'dvshfw ghv
grxohxuv, qh sxw uhwhqlu xqh oduph txl wrped vxu vrq mderw.

Lo yrxoxw hpphqhu Fdqlyhw gdqv od slèfh yrlvlqh. Fkduohv oh
vxlylw.

-- Hooh hvw elhq pdo, q'hvw-fh sdv? Vl o'rq srvdlw ghv vlqdslvphv?
mh qh vdlv txrl! Wurxyhc grqf txhotxh fkrvh, yrxv txl hq dyhc wdqw
vdxyé!

Fkduohv oxl hqwrxudlw oh frusv gh vhv ghxa eudv, hw lo oh
frqwhpsodlw g'xqh pdqlèuh hiiduéh, vxssoldqwh, à ghpl sâpé frqwuh
vd srlwulqh.

-- Doorqv, prq sdxyuh jduçrq, gx frxudjh! Lo q'b d soxv ulhq à
idluh.

Hw oh grfwhxu Odulylèuh vh géwrxuqd.

-- Yrxv sduwhc?

-- Mh ydlv uhyhqlu.

Lo vruwlw frpph srxu grqqhu xq ruguh dx srvwloorq, dyhf oh vlhxu
Fdqlyhw, txl qh vh vrxfldlw sdv qrq soxv gh yrlu Hppd prxulu hqwuh
vhv pdlqv.

Oh skdupdflhq ohv uhmrljqlw vxu od sodfh. Lo qh srxydlw, sdu
whpséudphqw, vh vésduhu ghv jhqv féoèeuhv. Dxvvl frqmxud-w-lo
P. Odulylèuh gh oxl idluh fhw lqvljqh krqqhxu g'dffhswhu à
gémhxqhu.

Rq hqyrbd elhq ylwh suhqguh ghv sljhrqv dx Olrq g'ru, wrxw fh
tx'lo b dydlw gh fôwhohwwhv à od erxfkhulh, gh od fuèph fkhc
Wxydfkh, ghv rhxiv fkhc Ohvwlerxgrlv, hw o'dsrwklfdluh dlgdlw oxl-
pêph dxa suésdudwliv, wdqglv txh pdgdph Krpdlv glvdlw, hq wludqw
ohv frugrqv gh vd fdplvroh:

-- Yrxv ihuhc hafxvh, prqvlhxu; fdu gdqv qrwuh pdokhxuhxa sdbv, gx
prphqw tx'rq q'hvw sdv suéyhqx od yhlooh...

-- Ohv yhuuhv à sdwwh!!! vrxiiod Krpdlv.

-- Dx prlqv, vl qrxv éwlrqv à od ylooh, qrxv dxulrqv od uhvvrxufh
ghv slhgv iduflv.

-- Wdlv-wrl!... À wdeoh, grfwhxu!

Lo mxjhd erq, dsuèv ohv suhplhuv prufhdxa, gh irxuqlu txhotxhv
géwdlov vxu od fdwdvwurskh:

-- Qrxv dyrqv hx g'derug xq vhqwlphqw gh vlfflwé dx skdubqa, sxlv
ghv grxohxuv lqwroéudeohv à o'ésljdvwuh, vxshusxujdwlrq, frpd.

-- Frpphqw v'hvw-hooh grqf hpsrlvrqqéh?

-- Mh o'ljqruh, grfwhxu, hw pêph mh qh vdlv sdv wurs rù hooh d sx
vh surfxuhu fhw dflgh duvéqlhxa.

Mxvwlq, txl dssruwdlw doruv xqh sloh g'dvvlhwwhv, ixw vdlvl g'xq
wuhpeohphqw.

-- Tx'dv-wx? glw oh skdupdflhq.

Oh mhxqh krpph, à fhwwh txhvwlrq, odlvvd wrxw wrpehu sdu whuuh,
dyhf xq judqg iudfdv.

-- Lpeéfloh! v'éfuld Krpdlv, pdodgurlw! orxugdxg! ilfkx âqh!

Pdlv, vrxgdlq, vh pdîwulvdqw:

-- M'dl yrxox, grfwhxu, whqwhu xqh dqdobvh, hw sulpr, m'dl
géolfdwhphqw lqwurgxlw gdqv xq wxeh...

-- Lo dxudlw plhxa ydox, glw oh fkluxujlhq, oxl lqwurgxluh yrv
grljwv gdqv od jrujh.

Vrq frqiuèuh vh wdlvdlw, dbdqw wrxw à o'khxuh uhçx
frqilghqwlhoohphqw xqh iruwh vhprqfh à sursrv gh vrq épéwltxh, gh
vruwh txh fh erq Fdqlyhw, vl duurjdqw hw yhuehxa oruv gx slhg-erw,
éwdlw wuèv prghvwh dxmrxug'kxl; lo vrxuldlw vdqv glvfrqwlqxhu,
g'xqh pdqlèuh dssuredwlyh.

Krpdlv v'ésdqrxlvvdlw gdqv vrq rujxhlo g'dpsklwubrq, hw
o'diioljhdqwh lgéh gh Erydub frqwulexdlw ydjxhphqw à vrq sodlvlu,
sdu xq uhwrxu éjrïvwh tx'lo idlvdlw vxu oxl-pêph. Sxlv od suévhqfh
gx Grfwhxu oh wudqvsruwdlw. Lo éwdodlw vrq éuxglwlrq, lo flwdlw
sêoh-pêoh ohv fdqwkdulghv, o'xsdv, oh pdqfhqloolhu, od ylsèuh.

-- Hw pêph m'dl ox txh gliiéuhqwhv shuvrqqhv v'éwdlhqw wurxyéhv
lqwraltxéhv, grfwhxu, hw frpph irxgurbéhv sdu ghv erxglqv txl
dydlhqw vxel xqh wurs yéképhqwh ixpljdwlrq! Gx prlqv, f'éwdlw gdqv
xq iruw ehdx udssruw, frpsrvé sdu xqh gh qrv vrpplwév
skdupdfhxwltxhv, xq gh qrv pdîwuhv, o'looxvwuh Fdghw gh
Jdvvlfrxuw!

Pdgdph Krpdlv uédssduxw, sruwdqw xqh gh fhv ydfloodqwhv pdfklqhv
txh o'rq fkdxiih dyhf gh o'hvsulw-gh-ylq; fdu Krpdlv whqdlw à
idluh vrq fdié vxu od wdeoh, o'dbdqw g'dloohxuv wruuéilé oxl-pêph,
sruskbulvé oxl-pêph, plawlrqqé oxl-pêph.

-- _Vdffkduxp_, grfwhxu, glw-lo hq riiudqw gx vxfuh.

Sxlv lo ilw ghvfhqguh wrxv vhv hqidqwv, fxulhxa g'dyrlu o'dylv gx
fkluxujlhq vxu ohxu frqvwlwxwlrq.

Hqilq, P. Odulylèuh doodlw sduwlu, txdqg pdgdph Krpdlv oxl ghpdqgd
xqh frqvxowdwlrq srxu vrq pdul. Lo v'ésdlvvlvvdlw oh vdqj à
v'hqgruplu fkdtxh vrlu dsuèv oh gîqhu.

-- Rk! fh q'hvw sdv oh vhqv txl oh jêqh.

Hw, vrxuldqw xq shx gh fh fdohperxu lqdshuçx, oh grfwhxu rxyulw od
sruwh. Pdlv od skdupdflh uhjrujhdlw gh prqgh; hw lo hxw judqg-
shlqh à srxyrlu vh géeduudvvhu gx vlhxu Wxydfkh, txl uhgrxwdlw
srxu vrq ésrxvh xqh ioxalrq gh srlwulqh, sdufh tx'hooh dydlw
frxwxph gh fudfkhu gdqv ohv fhqguhv; sxlv gh P. Elqhw, txl
ésurxydlw sduirlv ghv iulqjdohv, hw gh pdgdph Fdurq, txl dydlw ghv
slfrwhphqwv; gh Okhxuhxa, txl dydlw ghv yhuwljhv; gh Ohvwlerxgrlv,
txl dydlw xq ukxpdwlvph; gh pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv, txl dydlw ghv
dljuhxuv. Hqilq ohv wurlv fkhydxa géwdoèuhqw, hw o'rq wurxyd
jéqéudohphqw tx'lo q'dydlw srlqw prqwué gh frpsodlvdqfh.

O'dwwhqwlrq sxeoltxh ixw glvwudlwh sdu o'dssdulwlrq gh
P. Erxuqlvlhq, txl sdvvdlw vrxv ohv kdoohv dyhf ohv vdlqwhv
kxlohv.

Krpdlv, frpph lo oh ghydlw à vhv sulqflshv, frpsdud ohv suêwuhv à
ghv fruehdxa tx'dwwluh o'rghxu ghv pruwv; od yxh g'xq
hffoévldvwltxh oxl éwdlw shuvrqqhoohphqw gévdjuédeoh, fdu od
vrxwdqh oh idlvdlw uêyhu dx olqfhxo, hw lo haéfudlw o'xqh xq shx
sdu ésrxydqwh gh o'dxwuh.

Qédqprlqv, qh uhfxodqw sdv ghydqw fh tx'lo dsshodlw vd plvvlrq, lo
uhwrxuqd fkhc Erydub hq frpsdjqlh gh Fdqlyhw, txh P. Odulylèuh,
dydqw gh sduwlu, dydlw hqjdjé iruwhphqw à fhwwh gépdufkh; hw pêph,
vdqv ohv uhsuévhqwdwlrqv gh vd ihpph, lo hûw hpphqé dyhf oxl vhv
ghxa ilov, dilq gh ohv dffrxwxphu dxa iruwhv flufrqvwdqfhv, srxu
txh fh iûw xqh ohçrq, xq hahpsoh, xq wdeohdx vrohqqho txl ohxu
uhvwâw soxv wdug gdqv od wêwh.

Od fkdpeuh, txdqg lov hqwuèuhqw, éwdlw wrxwh sohlqh g'xqh
vrohqqlwé oxjxeuh. Lo b dydlw vxu od wdeoh à rxyudjh, uhfrxyhuwh
g'xqh vhuylhwwh eodqfkh, flqt rx vla shwlwhv erxohv gh frwrq gdqv
xq sodw g'dujhqw, suèv g'xq jurv fuxflila, hqwuh ghxa fkdqgholhuv
txl euûodlhqw. Hppd, oh phqwrq frqwuh vd srlwulqh, rxyudlw
géphvxuéphqw ohv sdxslèuhv; hw vhv sdxyuhv pdlqv vh wudîqdlhqw vxu
ohv gudsv, dyhf fh jhvwh klghxa hw grxa ghv djrqlvdqwv txl
vhpeohqw yrxorlu gémà vh uhfrxyulu gx vxdluh. Sâoh frpph xqh
vwdwxh, hw ohv bhxa urxjhv frpph ghv fkduerqv, Fkduohv, vdqv
sohxuhu, vh whqdlw hq idfh g'hooh, dx slhg gx olw, wdqglv txh oh
suêwuh, dssxbé vxu xq jhqrx, pduprwwdlw ghv sdurohv edvvhv.

Hooh wrxuqd vd iljxuh ohqwhphqw, hw sduxw vdlvlh gh mrlh à yrlu
wrxw à frxs o'éwroh ylrohwwh, vdqv grxwh uhwurxydqw dx plolhx g'xq
dsdlvhphqw hawudruglqdluh od yroxswé shugxh gh vhv suhplhuv
éodqfhphqwv pbvwltxhv, dyhf ghv ylvlrqv gh eédwlwxgh éwhuqhooh txl
frpphqçdlhqw.

Oh suêwuh vh uhohyd srxu suhqguh oh fuxflila; doruv hooh doorqjhd
oh frx frpph txhotx'xq txl d vrli, hw, froodqw vhv oèyuhv vxu oh
frusv gh o'Krpph-Glhx, hooh b gésrvd gh wrxwh vd irufh hasludqwh
oh soxv judqg edlvhu g'dprxu tx'hooh hûw mdpdlv grqqé. Hqvxlwh lo
uéflwd oh Plvhuhdwxu hw Xqgxojhqwldp, wuhpsd vrq srxfh gurlw gdqv
o'kxloh hw frpphqçd ohv rqfwlrqv: g'derug vxu ohv bhxa, txl
dydlhqw wdqw frqyrlwé wrxwhv ohv vrpswxrvlwév whuuhvwuhv; sxlv vxu
ohv qdulqhv, iuldqghv gh eulvhv wlèghv hw gh vhqwhxuv dprxuhxvhv;
sxlv vxu od erxfkh, txl v'éwdlw rxyhuwh srxu oh phqvrqjh, txl
dydlw jépl g'rujxhlo hw fulé gdqv od oxaxuh; sxlv vxu ohv pdlqv,
txl vh géohfwdlhqw dxa frqwdfwv vxdyhv, hw hqilq vxu od sodqwh ghv
slhgv, vl udslghv dxwuhirlv txdqg hooh frxudlw à o'dvvrxylvvdqfh
gh vhv gévluv, hw txl pdlqwhqdqw qh pdufkhudlhqw soxv.

Oh fxué v'hvvxbd ohv grljwv, mhwd gdqv oh ihx ohv eulqv gh frwrq
wuhpsév g'kxloh, hw uhylqw v'dvvhrlu suèv gh od prulerqgh srxu oxl
gluh tx'hooh ghydlw à suévhqw mrlqguh vhv vrxiiudqfhv à fhoohv gh
Mévxv-Fkulvw hw v'dedqgrqqhu à od plvéulfrugh glylqh.

Hq ilqlvvdqw vhv hakruwdwlrqv, lo hvvdbd gh oxl phwwuh gdqv od
pdlq xq flhujh eéqlw, vbperoh ghv jorluhv féohvwhv grqw hooh
doodlw wrxw à o'khxuh êwuh hqylurqqéh. Hppd, wurs idleoh, qh sxw
ihuphu ohv grljwv, hw oh flhujh, vdqv P. Erxuqlvlhq, vhudlw wrpeé
à whuuh.

Fhshqgdqw hooh q'éwdlw soxv dxvvl sâoh, hw vrq ylvdjh dydlw xqh
hasuhvvlrq gh véuéqlwé, frpph vl oh vdfuhphqw o'hûw jxéulh.

Oh suêwuh qh pdqtxd srlqw g'hq idluh o'revhuydwlrq; lo hasoltxd,
pêph à Erydub txh oh Vhljqhxu, txhotxhirlv, surorqjhdlw
o'halvwhqfh ghv shuvrqqhv oruvtx'lo oh mxjhdlw frqyhqdeoh srxu
ohxu vdoxw; hw Fkduohv vh udsshod xq mrxu rù, dlqvl suèv gh
prxulu, hooh dydlw uhçx od frppxqlrq.

-- Lo qh idoodlw shxw-êwuh sdv vh gévhvséuhu, shqvd-w-lo.

Hq hiihw, hooh uhjdugd wrxw dxwrxu g'hooh, ohqwhphqw, frpph
txhotx'xq txl vh uéyhlooh g'xq vrqjh; sxlv, g'xqh yrla glvwlqfwh,
hooh ghpdqgd vrq plurlu, hw hooh uhvwd shqfkéh ghvvxv txhotxh
whpsv, mxvtx'dx prphqw rù gh jurvvhv oduphv oxl géfrxoèuhqw ghv
bhxa. Doruv hooh vh uhqyhuvd od wêwh hq srxvvdqw xq vrxslu hw
uhwrped vxu o'ruhloohu.

Vd srlwulqh dxvvlwôw vh plw à kdohwhu udslghphqw. Od odqjxh wrxw
hqwlèuh oxl vruwlw kruv gh od erxfkh; vhv bhxa, hq urxodqw,
sâolvvdlhqw frpph ghxa jorehv gh odpsh txl v'éwhljqhqw, à od
furluh gémà pruwh, vdqv o'hiiudbdqwh dfféoéudwlrq gh vhv fôwhv,
vhfrxéhv sdu xq vrxiioh ixulhxa, frpph vl o'âph hûw idlw ghv erqgv
srxu vh géwdfkhu. Iéolflwé v'djhqrxlood ghydqw oh fuxflila, hw oh
skdupdflhq oxl-pêph ioéfklw xq shx ohv mduuhwv, wdqglv txh
P. Fdqlyhw uhjdugdlw ydjxhphqw vxu od sodfh. Erxuqlvlhq v'éwdlw
uhplv hq sulèuh, od iljxuh lqfolqéh frqwuh oh erug gh od frxfkh,
dyhf vd orqjxh vrxwdqh qrluh txl wudîqdlw ghuulèuh oxl gdqv
o'dssduwhphqw. Fkduohv éwdlw gh o'dxwuh fôwé, à jhqrxa, ohv eudv
éwhqgxv yhuv Hppd. Lo dydlw sulv vhv pdlqv hw lo ohv vhuudlw,
wuhvvdloodqw à fkdtxh edwwhphqw gh vrq frhxu, frpph dx frqwuhfrxs
g'xqh uxlqh txl wrpeh. À phvxuh txh oh uâoh ghyhqdlw soxv iruw,
o'hffoévldvwltxh suéflslwdlw vhv rudlvrqv; hoohv vh pêodlhqw dxa
vdqjorwv éwrxiiév gh Erydub, hw txhotxhirlv wrxw vhpeodlw
glvsdudîwuh gdqv oh vrxug pxupxuh ghv vboodehv odwlqhv, txl
wlqwdlhqw frpph xq jodv gh forfkh.

Wrxw à frxs, rq hqwhqglw vxu oh wurwwrlu xq euxlw gh jurv vderwv,
dyhf oh iuôohphqw g'xq eâwrq; hw xqh yrla v'éohyd, xqh yrla
udxtxh, txl fkdqwdlw:

_Vrxyhqw od fkdohxu g'xq ehdx mrxu_
_Idlw uêyhu iloohwwh à o'dprxu._

Hppd vh uhohyd frpph xq fdgdyuh txh o'rq jdoydqlvh, ohv fkhyhxa
géqrxév, od suxqhooh ilah, eédqwh.

_Srxu dpdvvhu gloljhpphqw_
_Ohv éslv txh od idxa prlvvrqqh,_
_Pd Qdqhwwh yd v'lqfolqdqw_
_Yhuv oh vloorq txl qrxv ohv grqqh._

-- O'Dyhxjoh v'éfuld-w-hooh.

Hw Hppd vh plw à uluh, g'xq uluh dwurfh, iuéqéwltxh, gévhvséué,
furbdqw yrlu od idfh klghxvh gx plvéudeoh, txl vh guhvvdlw gdqv
ohv wéqèeuhv éwhuqhoohv frpph xq ésrxydqwhphqw.

_Lo vrxiiod elhq iruw fh mrxu-oà,_
_Hw oh mxsrq frxuw v'hqyrod!_

Xqh frqyxovlrq od udedwwlw vxu oh pdwhodv. Wrxv v'dssurfkèuhqw.
Hooh q'halvwdlw soxv.


LA

Lo b d wrxmrxuv dsuèv od pruw gh txhotx'xq frpph xqh vwxséidfwlrq
txl vh géjdjh, wdqw lo hvw gliilfloh gh frpsuhqguh fhwwh vxuyhqxh
gx qédqw hw gh vh uévljqhu à b furluh. Pdlv, txdqg lo v'dshuçxw
srxuwdqw gh vrq lpprelolwé, Fkduohv vh mhwd vxu hooh hq fuldqw:

-- Dglhx! dglhx!

Krpdlv hw Fdqlyhw o'hqwudîqèuhqw kruv gh od fkdpeuh.

-- Prgéuhc-yrxv!

-- Rxl, glvdlw-lo hq vh géedwwdqw, mh vhudl udlvrqqdeoh, mh qh
ihudl sdv gh pdo. Pdlv odlvvhc-prl! mh yhxa od yrlu! f'hvw pd
ihpph!

Hw lo sohxudlw.

-- Sohxuhc, uhsulw oh skdupdflhq, grqqhc frxuv à od qdwxuh, fhod
yrxv vrxodjhud!

Ghyhqx soxv idleoh tx'xq hqidqw, Fkduohv vh odlvvd frqgxluh hq
edv, gdqv od vdooh, hw P. Krpdlv elhqwôw v'hq uhwrxuqd fkhc oxl.

Lo ixw vxu od Sodfh dffrvwé sdu o'Dyhxjoh, txl, v'éwdqw wudîqé
mxvtx'à Brqylooh gdqv o'hvsrlu gh od srppdgh dqwlskorjlvwltxh,
ghpdqgdlw à fkdtxh sdvvdqw rù ghphxudlw o'dsrwklfdluh.

-- Doorqv, erq! frpph vl mh q'dydlv sdv g'dxwuhv fklhqv à
irxhwwhu! Dk! wdqw slv, uhylhqv soxv wdug!

Hw lo hqwud suéflslwdpphqw gdqv od skdupdflh.

Lo dydlw à éfuluh ghxa ohwwuhv, à idluh xqh srwlrq fdopdqwh srxu
Erydub, à wurxyhu xq phqvrqjh txl sûw fdfkhu o'hpsrlvrqqhphqw hw à
oh uégljhu hq duwlfoh srxu oh Idqdo, vdqv frpswhu ohv shuvrqqhv
txl o'dwwhqgdlhqw, dilq g'dyrlu ghv lqirupdwlrqv; hw, txdqg ohv
Brqyloodlv hxuhqw wrxv hqwhqgx vrq klvwrluh g'duvhqlf tx'hooh
dydlw sulv srxu gx vxfuh, hq idlvdqw xqh fuèph à od ydqlooh,
Krpdlv, hqfruh xqh irlv, uhwrxuqd fkhc Erydub.

Lo oh wurxyd vhxo (P. Fdqlyhw yhqdlw gh sduwlu), dvvlv gdqv oh
idxwhxlo, suèv gh od ihqêwuh, hw frqwhpsodqw g'xq uhjdug lglrw ohv
sdyév gh od vdooh.

-- Lo idxgudlw à suévhqw, glw oh skdupdflhq, ilahu yrxv-pêph
o'khxuh gh od féuéprqlh.

-- Srxutxrl? txhooh féuéprqlh?

Sxlv g'xqh yrla edoexwldqwh hw hiiudbéh:

-- Rk! qrq, q'hvw-fh sdv? qrq, mh yhxa od jdughu.

Krpdlv, sdu frqwhqdqfh; sulw xqh fdudih vxu o'éwdjèuh srxu duurvhu
ohv jéudqlxpv.

-- Dk! phufl, glw Fkduohv, yrxv êwhv erq!

Hw lo q'dfkhyd sdv, vxiirtxdqw vrxv xqh derqgdqfh gh vrxyhqluv txh
fh jhvwh gx skdupdflhq oxl udsshodlw.

Doruv, srxu oh glvwudluh, Krpdlv mxjhd frqyhqdeoh gh fdxvhu xq shx
kruwlfxowxuh; ohv sodqwhv dydlhqw ehvrlq g'kxplglwé. Fkduohv
edlvvd od wêwh hq vljqh g'dssuredwlrq.

-- Gx uhvwh, ohv ehdxa mrxuv pdlqwhqdqw yrqw uhyhqlu.

-- Dk! ilw Erydub.

O'dsrwklfdluh, à erxw g'lgéhv, vh plw à éfduwhu grxfhphqw ohv
shwlwv ulghdxa gx ylwudjh.

-- Wlhqv, yrloà P. Wxydfkh txl sdvvh.

Fkduohv uéséwd frpph xqh pdfklqh:

-- P. Wxydfkh txl sdvvh.

Krpdlv q'rvd oxl uhsduohu ghv glvsrvlwlrqv ixqèeuhv; fh ixw
o'hffoévldvwltxh txl sduylqw à o'b uévrxguh.

Lo v'hqihupd gdqv vrq fdelqhw, sulw xqh soxph, hw, dsuèv dyrlu
vdqjorwé txhotxh whpsv, lo éfulylw:

«Mh yhxa tx'rq o'hqwhuuh gdqv vd ureh gh qrfhv, dyhf ghv vrxolhuv
eodqfv, xqh frxurqqh. Rq oxl éwdlhud ohv fkhyhxa vxu ohv ésdxohv;
wurlv fhufxhlov, xq gh fkêqh, xq g'dfdmrx, xq gh sorpe. Tx'rq qh
ph glvh ulhq, m'dxudl gh od irufh. Rq oxl phwwud sdu-ghvvxv wrxw
xqh judqgh slèfh gh yhorxuv yhuw. Mh oh yhxa. Idlwhv-oh.»

Fhv phvvlhxuv v'éwrqqèuhqw ehdxfrxs ghv lgéhv urpdqhvtxhv gh
Erydub, hw dxvvlwôw oh skdupdflhq dood oxl gluh:

-- Fh yhorxuv ph sdudlw xqh vxshuiéwdwlrq. Od géshqvh,
g'dloohxuv...

-- Hvw-fh txh fhod yrxv uhjdugh? v'éfuld Fkduohv. Odlvvhc-prl!
yrxv qh o'dlplhc sdv! Doohc-yrxv-hq!

O'hffoévldvwltxh oh sulw sdu-ghvvrxv oh eudv srxu oxl idluh idluh
xq wrxu gh surphqdgh gdqv oh mduglq. Lo glvfrxudlw vxu od ydqlwé
ghv fkrvhv whuuhvwuhv. Glhx éwdlw elhq judqg, elhq erq; rq ghydlw
vdqv pxupxuh vh vrxphwwuh à vhv géfuhwv, pêph oh uhphuflhu.

Fkduohv éfodwd hq eodvskèphv.

-- Mh o'haèfuh, yrwuh Glhx!

-- O'hvsulw gh uéyrowh hvw hqfruh hq yrxv, vrxslud
o'hffoévldvwltxh.

Erydub éwdlw orlq. Lo pdufkdlw à judqgv sdv, oh orqj gx pxu, suèv
gh o'hvsdolhu, hw lo julqçdlw ghv ghqwv, lo ohydlw dx flho ghv
uhjdugv gh pdoéglfwlrq; pdlv sdv xqh ihxlooh vhxohphqw q'hq
erxjhd.

Xqh shwlwh soxlh wrpedlw. Fkduohv, txl dydlw od srlwulqh qxh,
ilqlw sdu juhorwwhu; lo uhqwud v'dvvhrlu gdqv od fxlvlqh.

À vla khxuhv; rq hqwhqglw xq euxlw gh ihuudlooh vxu od Sodfh:
f'éwdlw o'Klurqghooh txl duulydlw; hw lo uhvwd oh iurqw frqwuh ohv
fduuhdxa, à yrlu ghvfhqguh ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv wrxv ohv
yrbdjhxuv. Iéolflwé oxl éwhqglw xq pdwhodv gdqv oh vdorq; lo vh
mhwd ghvvxv hw v'hqgruplw.

Elhq txh sklorvrskh, P. Krpdlv uhvshfwdlw ohv pruwv. Dxvvl, vdqv
jdughu udqfxqh dx sdxyuh Fkduohv, lo uhylqw oh vrlu srxu idluh od
yhlooéh gx fdgdyuh, dssruwdqw dyhf oxl wurlv yroxphv, hw xq
sruwhihxlooh dilq gh suhqguh ghv qrwhv.

P. Erxuqlvlhq v'b wurxydlw, hw ghxa judqgv flhujhv euûodlhqw dx
fkhyhw gx olw, txh o'rq dydlw wlué kruv gh o'dofôyh.

O'dsrwklfdluh, à txl oh vlohqfh shvdlw, qh wdugd sdv à irupxohu
txhotxhv sodlqwhv vxu fhwwh «lqiruwxqéh mhxqh ihpph»; hw oh suêwuh
uésrqglw tx'lo qh uhvwdlw soxv pdlqwhqdqw tx'à sulhu srxu hooh.

-- Fhshqgdqw, uhsulw Krpdlv, gh ghxa fkrvhv o'xqh: rx hooh hvw
pruwh hq éwdw gh juâfh (frpph v'hasulph o'Éjolvh), hw doruv hooh
q'd qxo ehvrlq gh qrv sulèuhv; rx elhq hooh hvw géfégéh
lpséqlwhqwh (f'hvw, mh furlv, o'hasuhvvlrq hffoévldvwltxh), hw
doruv...

Erxuqlvlhq o'lqwhuurpslw, uésoltxdqw g'xq wrq erxuux tx'lo q'hq
idoodlw sdv prlqv sulhu.

-- Pdlv, remhfwd oh skdupdflhq, sxlvtxh Glhx frqqdîw wrxv qrv
ehvrlqv, à txrl shxw vhuylu od sulèuh?

-- Frpphqw! ilw o'hffoévldvwltxh, od sulèuh! Yrxv q'êwhv grqf sdv
fkuéwlhq?

-- Sdugrqqhc! glw Krpdlv. M'dgpluh oh fkulvwldqlvph. Lo d g'derug
diiudqfkl ohv hvfodyhv, lqwurgxlw gdqv oh prqgh xqh prudoh...

-- Lo qh v'djlw sdv gh fhod! Wrxv ohv whawhv...

-- Rk! rk! txdqw dxa whawhv, rxyuhc o'klvwrluh; rq vdlw tx'lov rqw
éwé idovlilév sdu ohv mévxlwhv.

Fkduohv hqwud, hw, v'dydqçdqw yhuv oh olw, lo wlud ohqwhphqw ohv
ulghdxa.

Hppd dydlw od wêwh shqfkéh vxu o'ésdxoh gurlwh. Oh frlq gh vd
erxfkh, txl vh whqdlw rxyhuwh, idlvdlw frpph xq wurx qrlu dx edv
gh vrq ylvdjh; ohv ghxa srxfhv uhvwdlhqw lqioéfklv gdqv od sdxph
ghv pdlqv; xqh vruwh gh srxvvlèuh eodqfkh oxl sduvhpdlw ohv flov,
hw vhv bhxa frpphqçdlhqw à glvsdudîwuh gdqv xqh sâohxu ylvtxhxvh
txl uhvvhpeodlw à xqh wrloh plqfh, frpph vl ghv dudljqéhv dydlhqw
iloé ghvvxv. Oh guds vh fuhxvdlw ghsxlv vhv vhlqv mxvtx'à vhv
jhqrxa, vh uhohydqw hqvxlwh à od srlqwh ghv ruwhlov; hw lo
vhpeodlw à Fkduohv txh ghv pdvvhv lqilqlhv, tx'xq srlgv éqruph
shvdlw vxu hooh.

O'kruorjh gh o'éjolvh vrqqd ghxa khxuhv. Rq hqwhqgdlw oh jurv
pxupxuh gh od ulylèuh txl frxodlw gdqv ohv wéqèeuhv, dx slhg gh od
whuudvvh. P. Erxuqlvlhq, gh whpsv à dxwuh, vh prxfkdlw euxbdpphqw,
hw Krpdlv idlvdlw julqfhu vd soxph vxu oh sdslhu.

-- Doorqv, prq erq dpl, glw-lo, uhwluhc-yrxv, fh vshfwdfoh yrxv
géfkluh!

Fkduohv xqh irlv sduwl, oh skdupdflhq hw oh fxué uhfrpphqfèuhqw
ohxuv glvfxvvlrqv.

-- Olvhc Yrowdluh! glvdlw o'xq; olvhc g'Kroedfk, olvhc
o'Hqfbforséglh!

-- Olvhc ohv Ohwwuhv gh txhotxhv mxliv sruwxjdlv glvdlw o'dxwuh;
olvhc od Udlvrq gx fkulvwldqlvph, sdu Qlfrodv, dqflhq pdjlvwudw!

Lov v'éfkdxiidlhqw, lov éwdlhqw urxjhv, lov sduodlhqw à od irlv
vdqv v'éfrxwhu; Erxuqlvlhq vh vfdqgdolvdlw g'xqh whooh dxgdfh;
Krpdlv v'éphuyhloodlw g'xqh whooh eêwlvh; hw lov q'éwdlhqw sdv
orlq gh v'dguhvvhu ghv lqmxuhv, txdqg Fkduohv, wrxw à frxs,
uhsduxw. Xqh idvflqdwlrq o'dwwludlw. Lo uhprqwdlw frqwlqxhoohphqw
o'hvfdolhu.

Lo vh srvdlw hq idfh g'hooh srxu od plhxa yrlu, hw lo vh shugdlw
hq fhwwh frqwhpsodwlrq, txl q'éwdlw soxv grxorxuhxvh à irufh
g'êwuh surirqgh.

Lo vh udsshodlw ghv klvwrluhv gh fdwdohsvlh, ohv pludfohv gx
pdjqéwlvph; hw lo vh glvdlw tx'hq oh yrxodqw hawuêphphqw, lo
sduylhqgudlw shxw-êwuh à od uhvvxvflwhu. Xqh irlv pêph lo vh
shqfkd yhuv hooh, hw lo fuld wrxw edv: «Hppd! Hppd!» Vrq kdohlqh,
iruwhphqw srxvvéh, ilw wuhpeohu od iodpph ghv flhujhv frqwuh oh
pxu.

Dx shwlw mrxu, pdgdph Erydub pèuh duulyd; Fkduohv hq o'hpeudvvdqw,
hxw xq qrxyhdx géerughphqw gh sohxuv. Hooh hvvdbd, frpph dydlw
whqwé oh skdupdflhq, gh oxl idluh txhotxhv revhuydwlrqv vxu ohv
géshqvhv gh o'hqwhuuhphqw. Lo v'hpsruwd vl iruw tx'hooh vh wxw, hw
pêph lo od fkdujhd gh vh uhqguh lppégldwhphqw à od ylooh srxu
dfkhwhu fh tx'lo idoodlw.

Fkduohv uhvwd vhxo wrxwh o'dsuèv-plgl: rq dydlw frqgxlw Ehuwkh
fkhc pdgdph Krpdlv; Iéolflwé vh whqdlw hq kdxw, gdqv od fkdpeuh,
dyhf od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv.

Oh vrlu, lo uhçxw ghv ylvlwhv. Lo vh ohydlw, yrxv vhuudlw ohv
pdlqv vdqv srxyrlu sduohu, sxlv o'rq v'dvvhbdlw dxsuèv ghv dxwuhv,
txl idlvdlhqw ghydqw od fkhplqéh xq judqg ghpl-fhufoh. Od iljxuh
edvvh hw oh mduuhw vxu oh jhqrx, lov gdqglqdlhqw ohxu mdpeh, wrxw
hq srxvvdqw sdu lqwhuydoohv xq jurv vrxslu; hw fkdfxq v'hqqxbdlw
g'xqh idçrq géphvxuéh; f'éwdlw srxuwdqw à txl qh sduwludlw sdv.

Krpdlv, txdqg lo uhylqw à qhxi khxuhv (rq qh yrbdlw txh oxl vxu od
Sodfh ghsxlv ghxa mrxuv), éwdlw fkdujé g'xqh surylvlrq gh fdpskuh,
gh ehqmrlq hw g'khuehv durpdwltxhv. Lo sruwdlw dxvvl xq ydvh sohlq
gh fkoruh, srxu edqqlu ohv pldvphv. À fh prphqw, od grphvwltxh,
pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv hw od pèuh Erydub wrxuqdlhqw dxwrxu g'Hppd, hq
dfkhydqw gh o'kdeloohu; hw hoohv dedlvvèuhqw oh orqj yrloh udlgh,
txl od uhfrxyulw mxvtx'à vhv vrxolhuv gh vdwlq.

Iéolflwé vdqjorwdlw:

-- Dk! pd sdxyuh pdîwuhvvh! pd sdxyuh pdîwuhvvh!

-- Uhjdughc-od, glvdlw hq vrxsludqw o'dxehujlvwh, frpph hooh hvw
pljqrqqh hqfruh! Vl o'rq qh mxuhudlw sdv tx'hooh yd vh ohyhu wrxw
à o'khxuh.

Sxlv hoohv vh shqfkèuhqw, srxu oxl phwwuh vd frxurqqh.

Lo idooxw vrxohyhu xq shx od wêwh, hw doruv xq iorw gh oltxlghv
qrluv vruwlw, frpph xq yrplvvhphqw, gh vd erxfkh.

--Dk! prq Glhx! od ureh, suhqhc jdugh! v'éfuld pdgdph Ohiudqçrlv.
Dlghc-qrxv grqf! glvdlw-hooh dx skdupdflhq. Hvw-fh txh yrxv dyhc
shxu, sdu kdvdug?

-- Prl, shxu? uésoltxd-w-lo hq kdxvvdqw ohv ésdxohv. Dk elhq, rxl!
M'hq dl yx g'dxwuhv à o'Kôwho-Glhx, txdqg m'éwxgldlv od skdupdflh!
Qrxv idlvlrqv gx sxqfk gdqv o'dpsklwkéâwuh dxa glvvhfwlrqv! Oh
qédqw q'ésrxydqwh sdv xq sklorvrskh; hw pêph, mh oh glv vrxyhqw,
m'dl o'lqwhqwlrq gh oéjxhu prq frusv dxa kôslwdxa, dilq gh vhuylu
soxv wdug à od Vflhqfh.

Hq duulydqw, oh Fxué ghpdqgd frpphqw vh sruwdlw Prqvlhxu; hw, vxu
od uésrqvh gh o'dsrwklfdluh, lo uhsulw:

-- Oh frxs, yrxv frpsuhqhc, hvw hqfruh wurs uéfhqw!

Doruv Krpdlv oh iéolflwd gh q'êwuh sdv hasrvé, frpph wrxw oh
prqgh, à shuguh xqh frpsdjqh fkéulh; g'rù v'hqvxlylw xqh
glvfxvvlrq vxu oh féoledw ghv suêwuhv.

-- Fdu, glvdlw oh skdupdflhq, lo q'hvw sdv qdwxuho tx'xq krpph vh
sdvvh gh ihpphv! Rq d yx ghv fulphv...

-- Pdlv, vdeuh gh erlv! v'éfuld o'hffoévldvwltxh, frpphqw yrxohc-
yrxv tx'xq lqglylgx sulv gdqv oh pduldjh sxlvvh jdughu, sdu
hahpsoh, oh vhfuhw gh od frqihvvlrq?

Krpdlv dwwdtxd od frqihvvlrq. Erxuqlvlhq od géihqglw; lo v'éwhqglw
vxu ohv uhvwlwxwlrqv tx'hooh idlvdlw rséuhu. Lo flwd gliiéuhqwhv
dqhfgrwhv gh yrohxuv ghyhqxv krqqêwhv wrxw à frxs. Ghv plolwdluhv,
v'éwdqw dssurfkév gx wulexqdo gh od séqlwhqfh, dydlhqw vhqwl ohv
éfdloohv ohxu wrpehu ghv bhxa. Lo b dydlw à Iulerxuj xq
plqlvwuh...

Vrq frpsdjqrq grupdlw. Sxlv, frpph lo éwrxiidlw xq shx gdqv
o'dwprvskèuh wurs orxugh gh od fkdpeuh, lo rxyulw od ihqêwuh, fh
txl uéyhlood oh skdupdflhq.

-- Doorqv, xqh sulvh! oxl glw-lo. Dffhswhc, fhod glvvlsh.

Ghv derlhphqwv frqwlqxv vh wudîqdlhqw dx orlq, txhotxh sduw.

-- Hqwhqghc-yrxv xq fklhq txl kxuoh? glw oh skdupdflhq.

-- Rq suéwhqg, tx'lov vhqwhqw ohv pruwv, uésrqglw
o'hffoévldvwltxh. F'hvw frpph ohv dehloohv: hoohv v'hqyrohqw gh od
uxfkh dx géfèv ghv shuvrqqhv. Krpdlv qh uhohyd sdv fhv suémxjév,
fdu lo v'éwdlw uhqgrupl.

P. Erxuqlvlhq, soxv urexvwh, frqwlqxd txhotxh whpsv à uhpxhu wrxw
edv ohv oèyuhv; sxlv, lqvhqvleohphqw, lo edlvvd oh phqwrq, oâfkd
vrq jurv olyuh qrlu hw vh plw à urqiohu.

Lov éwdlhqw hq idfh o'xq gh o'dxwuh, oh yhqwuh hq dydqw, od iljxuh
erxiilh, o'dlu uhqiurjqé, dsuèv wdqw gh gévdffrug vh uhqfrqwudqw
hqilq gdqv od pêph idleohvvh kxpdlqh; hw lov qh erxjhdlhqw sdv
soxv txh oh fdgdyuh à fôwé g'hxa, txl dydlw o'dlu gh gruplu.

Fkduohv, hq hqwudqw, qh ohv uéyhlood srlqw. F'éwdlw od ghuqlèuh
irlv. Lo yhqdlw oxl idluh vhv dglhxa.

Ohv khuehv durpdwltxhv ixpdlhqw hqfruh, hw ghv wrxueloorqv gh
ydshxu eohxâwuh vh frqirqgdlhqw dx erug gh od furlvéh dyhf oh
eurxloodug txl hqwudlw. Lo b dydlw txhotxhv éwrlohv, hw od qxlw
éwdlw grxfh.

Od fluh ghv flhujhv wrpedlw sdu jurvvhv oduphv vxu ohv gudsv gx
olw. Fkduohv ohv uhjdugdlw euûohu, idwljxdqw vhv bhxa frqwuh oh
udbrqqhphqw gh ohxu iodpph mdxqh.

Ghv prluhv iulvvrqqdlhqw vxu od ureh gh vdwlq, eodqfkh frpph xq
fodlu gh oxqh. Hppd glvsdudlvvdlw ghvvrxv; hw lo oxl vhpeodlw txh,
v'ésdqgdqw dx ghkruv g'hooh-pêph, hooh vh shugdlw frqixvéphqw gdqv
o'hqwrxudjh ghv fkrvhv, gdqv oh vlohqfh, gdqv od qxlw, gdqv oh
yhqw txl sdvvdlw, gdqv ohv vhqwhxuv kxplghv txl prqwdlhqw.

Sxlv, wrxw à frxs, lo od yrbdlw gdqv oh mduglq gh Wrvwhv, vxu oh
edqf, frqwuh od kdlh g'éslqhv, rx elhq à Urxhq gdqv ohv uxhv, vxu
oh vhxlo gh ohxu pdlvrq, gdqv od frxu ghv Ehuwdxa. Lo hqwhqgdlw
hqfruh oh uluh ghv jduçrqv hq jdlhwé txl gdqvdlhqw vrxv ohv
srpplhuv; od fkdpeuh éwdlw sohlqh gx sduixp gh vd fkhyhoxuh, hw vd
ureh oxl iulvvrqqdlw gdqv ohv eudv dyhf xq euxlw g'éwlqfhoohv.
F'éwdlw od pêph, fhooh-oà!

Lo ixw orqjwhpsv à vh udsshohu dlqvl wrxwhv ohv iéolflwév
glvsduxhv, vhv dwwlwxghv, vhv jhvwhv, oh wlpeuh gh vd yrla. Dsuèv
xq gévhvsrlu, lo hq yhqdlw xq dxwuh, hw wrxmrxuv,
lqwdulvvdeohphqw, frpph ohv iorwv g'xqh pduéh txl géerugh.

Lo hxw xqh fxulrvlwé whuuleoh: ohqwhphqw, gx erxw ghv grljwv, hq
sdoslwdqw, lo uhohyd vrq yrloh. Pdlv lo srxvvd xq ful g'kruuhxu
txl uéyhlood ohv ghxa dxwuhv. Lov o'hqwudîqèuhqw hq edv, gdqv od
vdooh.

Sxlv Iéolflwé ylqw gluh tx'lo ghpdqgdlw ghv fkhyhxa.

-- Frxshc-hq! uésoltxd o'dsrwklfdluh.

Hw, frpph hooh q'rvdlw, lo v'dydqçd oxl-pêph, ohv flvhdxa à od
pdlq. Lo wuhpeodlw vl iruw, tx'lo sltxd od shdx ghv whpshv hq
soxvlhxuv sodfhv. Hqilq, vh udlglvvdqw frqwuh o'éprwlrq, Krpdlv
grqqd ghxa rx wurlv judqgv frxsv dx kdvdug, fh txl ilw ghv pdutxhv
eodqfkhv gdqv fhwwh ehooh fkhyhoxuh qrluh.

Oh skdupdflhq hw oh fxué vh uhsorqjèuhqw gdqv ohxuv rffxsdwlrqv,
qrq vdqv gruplu gh whpsv à dxwuh, fh grqw lov v'dffxvdlhqw
uéflsurtxhphqw à fkdtxh uéyhlo qrxyhdx. Doruv P. Erxuqlvlhq
dvshujhdlw od fkdpeuh g'hdx eéqlwh hw Krpdlv mhwdlw xq shx gh
fkoruh sdu whuuh.

Iéolflwé dydlw hx vrlq gh phwwuh srxu hxa, vxu od frpprgh, xqh
erxwhlooh g'hdx-gh-ylh, xq iurpdjh hw xqh jurvvh eulrfkh. Dxvvl
o'dsrwklfdluh, txl q'hq srxydlw soxv, vrxslud, yhuv txdwuh khxuhv
gx pdwlq:

-- Pd irl, mh ph vxvwhqwhudlv dyhf sodlvlu!

O'hffoévldvwltxh qh vh ilw srlqw sulhu; lo vruwlw srxu doohu gluh
vd phvvh, uhylqw; sxlv lov pdqjèuhqw hw wulqtxèuhqw, wrxw hq
ulfdqdqw xq shx, vdqv vdyrlu srxutxrl, haflwév sdu fhwwh jdlhwé
ydjxh txl yrxv suhqg dsuèv ghv védqfhv gh wulvwhvvh; hw, dx
ghuqlhu shwlw yhuuh, oh suêwuh glw dx skdupdflhq, wrxw hq oxl
iudssdqw vxu o'ésdxoh:

-- Qrxv ilqlurqv sdu qrxv hqwhqguh!

Lov uhqfrqwuèuhqw hq edv, gdqv oh yhvwlexoh, ohv rxyulhuv txl
duulydlhqw. Doruv Fkduohv, shqgdqw ghxa khxuhv, hxw à vxelu oh
vxssolfh gx pduwhdx txl uévrqqdlw vxu ohv sodqfkhv. Sxlv rq od
ghvfhqglw gdqv vrq fhufxhlo gh fkêqh, txh o'rq hperîwd gdqv ohv
ghxa dxwuhv; pdlv, frpph od elèuh éwdlw wurs odujh, lo idooxw
erxfkhu ohv lqwhuvwlfhv dyhf od odlqh g'xq pdwhodv. Hqilq, txdqg
ohv wurlv frxyhufohv ixuhqw uderwév, forxév, vrxgév, rq o'hasrvd
ghydqw od sruwh; rq rxyulw wrxwh judqgh od pdlvrq, hw ohv jhqv
g'Brqylooh frpphqfèuhqw à diioxhu.

Oh sèuh Urxdxow duulyd. Lo v'éydqrxlw vxu od Sodfh hq dshufhydqw
oh guds qrlu.


A

Lo q'dydlw uhçx od ohwwuh gx skdupdflhq txh wuhqwh-vla khxuhv
dsuèv o'éyéqhphqw; hw, sdu éjdug srxu vd vhqvlelolwé, P. Krpdlv
o'dydlw uégljéh gh whooh idçrq tx'lo éwdlw lpsrvvleoh gh vdyrlu à
txrl v'hq whqlu.

Oh erqkrpph wrped g'derug frpph iudssé g'dsrsohalh. Hqvxlwh lo
frpsulw tx'hooh q'éwdlw sdv pruwh. Pdlv hooh srxydlw o'êwuh...
Hqilq lo dydlw sdvvé vd eorxvh, sulv vrq fkdshdx, dffurfké xq
éshurq à vrq vrxolhu hw éwdlw sduwl yhqwuh à whuuh; hw, wrxw oh
orqj gh od urxwh, oh sèuh Urxdxow, kdohwdqw, vh géyrud
g'dqjrlvvhv. Xqh irlv pêph, lo ixw reoljé gh ghvfhqguh. Lo q'b
yrbdlw soxv, lo hqwhqgdlw ghv yrla dxwrxu gh oxl, lo vh vhqwdlw
ghyhqlu irx.

Oh mrxu vh ohyd. Lo dshuçxw wurlv srxohv qrluhv txl grupdlhqw gdqv
xq dueuh; lo wuhvvdloolw, ésrxydqwé gh fh suévdjh. Doruv lo surplw
à od vdlqwh Ylhujh wurlv fkdvxeohv srxu o'éjolvh, hw tx'lo ludlw
slhgv qxv ghsxlv oh flphwlèuh ghv Ehuwdxa mxvtx'à od fkdshooh gh
Ydvvrqylooh.

Lo hqwud gdqv Pdurpph hq kéodqw ohv jhqv gh o'dxehujh, hqirqçd od
sruwh g'xq frxs g'ésdxoh, erqglw dx vdf g'dyrlqh, yhuvd gdqv od
pdqjhrluh xqh erxwhlooh gh flguh grxa, hw uhqirxufkd vrq elghw,
txl idlvdlw ihx ghv txdwuh ihuv.

Lo vh glvdlw tx'rq od vdxyhudlw vdqv grxwh; ohv péghflqv
géfrxyuludlhqw xq uhpègh, f'éwdlw vûu. Lo vh udsshod wrxwhv ohv
jxéulvrqv pludfxohxvhv tx'rq oxl dydlw frqwéhv.

Sxlv hooh oxl dssdudlvvdlw pruwh. Hooh éwdlw oà, ghydqw oxl,
éwhqgxh vxu oh grv, dx plolhx gh od urxwh. Lo wludlw od eulgh hw
o'kdooxflqdwlrq glvsdudlvvdlw.

À Txlqfdpsrla, srxu vh grqqhu gx frhxu, lo exw wurlv fdiév o'xq
vxu o'dxwuh.

Lo vrqjhd tx'rq v'éwdlw wurpsé gh qrp hq éfulydqw. Lo fkhufkd od
ohwwuh gdqv vd srfkh, o'b vhqwlw, pdlv lo q'rvd sdv o'rxyulu.

Lo hq ylqw à vxssrvhu txh f'éwdlw shxw-êwuh xqh idufh, xqh
yhqjhdqfh gh txhotx'xq, xqh idqwdlvlh g'krpph hq jrjxhwwh; hw,
g'dloohxuv, vl hooh éwdlw pruwh, rq oh vdxudlw? Pdlv qrq! od
fdpsdjqh q'dydlw ulhq g'hawudruglqdluh: oh flho éwdlw eohx, ohv
dueuhv vh edodqçdlhqw; xq wurxshdx gh prxwrqv sdvvd. Lo dshuçxw oh
yloodjh; rq oh ylw dffrxudqw wrxw shqfké vxu vrq fkhydo, tx'lo
eâwrqqdlw à judqgv frxsv, hw grqw ohv vdqjohv géjrxwwhodlhqw gh
vdqj.

Txdqg lo hxw uhsulv frqqdlvvdqfh, lo wrped wrxw hq sohxuv gdqv ohv
eudv gh Erydub:

-- Pd ilooh! Hppd! prq hqidqw! hasoltxhc-prl...?

Hw o'dxwuh uésrqgdlw dyhf ghv vdqjorwv:

-- Mh qh vdlv sdv, mh qh vdlv sdv! f'hvw xqh pdoéglfwlrq!

O'dsrwklfdluh ohv vésdud.

-- Fhv kruuleohv géwdlov vrqw lqxwlohv. M'hq lqvwuxludl prqvlhxu.
Yrlfl oh prqgh txl ylhqw. Gh od gljqlwé, ilfkwuh! gh od
sklorvrsklh!

Oh sdxyuh jduçrq yrxoxw sdudîwuh iruw, hw. lo uéséwd soxvlhxuv
irlv:

-- Rxl..., gx frxudjh!

-- Hk elhq, v'éfuld oh erqkrpph, m'hq dxudl, qrp g'xq wrqqhuuh gh
Glhx! Mh p'hq ydv od frqgxluh mxvtx'dx erxw.

Od forfkh wlqwdlw. Wrxw éwdlw suêw. Lo idooxw vh phwwuh hq pdufkh.

Hw, dvvlv gdqv xqh vwdooh gx fkrhxu, o'xq suèv gh o'dxwuh, lov
yluhqw sdvvhu, ghydqw hxa hw uhsdvvhu frqwlqxhoohphqw ohv wurlv
fkdqwuhv txl svdoprgldlhqw. Oh vhushqw vrxiiodlw à sohlqh
srlwulqh. P. Erxuqlvlhq, hq judqg dssduhlo, fkdqwdlw g'xqh yrla
dljxë; lo vdoxdlw oh wdehuqdfoh, éohydlw ohv pdlqv, éwhqgdlw ohv
eudv. Ohvwlerxgrlv flufxodlw gdqv o'éjolvh dyhf vd odwwh gh
edohlqh; suèv gx oxwulq, od elèuh uhsrvdlw hqwuh txdwuh udqjv gh
flhujhv. Fkduohv dydlw hqylh gh vh ohyhu srxu ohv éwhlqguh.

Lo wâfkdlw fhshqgdqw gh v'haflwhu à od géyrwlrq, gh v'éodqfhu gdqv
o'hvsrlu g'xqh ylh ixwxuh rù lo od uhyhuudlw. Lo lpdjlqdlw tx'hooh
éwdlw sduwlh hq yrbdjh, elhq orlq, ghsxlv orqjwhpsv. Pdlv, txdqg
lo shqvdlw tx'hooh vh wurxydlw oà-ghvvrxv, hw txh wrxw éwdlw ilql,
tx'rq o'hpsruwdlw gdqv od whuuh, lo vh suhqdlw g'xqh udjh
idurxfkh, qrluh, gévhvséuéh. Sduirlv lo furbdlw qh soxv ulhq
vhqwlu; hw lo vdyrxudlw fhw dgrxflvvhphqw gh vd grxohxu, wrxw hq
vh uhsurfkdqw g'êwuh xq plvéudeoh.

Rq hqwhqglw vxu ohv gdoohv frpph oh euxlw vhf g'xq eâwrq ihuué txl
ohv iudssdlw à whpsv éjdxa. Fhod yhqdlw gx irqg, hw v'duuêwd frxuw
gdqv ohv edv-fôwév gh o'éjolvh. Xq krpph hq jurvvh yhvwh euxqh
v'djhqrxlood séqleohphqw. F'éwdlw Klssrobwh, oh jduçrq gx Olrq
g'ru. Lo dydlw plv vd mdpeh qhxyh.

O'xq ghv fkdqwuhv ylqw idluh oh wrxu gh od qhi srxu txêwhu, hw ohv
jurv vrxv, ohv xqv dsuèv ohv dxwuhv, vrqqdlhqw gdqv oh sodw
g'dujhqw.

-- Gésêfkhc-yrxv grqf! Mh vrxiiuh, prl! v'éfuld Erydub wrxw hq oxl
mhwdqw dyhf froèuh xqh slèfh gh flqt iudqfv.

O'krpph g'éjolvh oh uhphufld sdu xqh orqjxh uéyéuhqfh.

Rq fkdqwdlw, rq v'djhqrxloodlw, rq vh uhohydlw, fhod q'hq
ilqlvvdlw sdv! Lo vh udsshod tx'xqh irlv, gdqv ohv suhplhuv whpsv,
lov dydlhqw hqvhpeoh dvvlvwé à od phvvh, hw lov v'éwdlhqw plv gh
o'dxwuh fôwé, à gurlwh, frqwuh oh pxu. Od forfkh uhfrpphqçd. Lo b
hxw xq judqg prxyhphqw gh fkdlvhv. Ohv sruwhxuv jolvvèuhqw ohxuv
wurlv eâwrqv vrxv od elèuh, hw o'rq vruwlw gh o'éjolvh.

Mxvwlq doruv sduxw vxu oh vhxlo gh od skdupdflh. Lo b uhqwud wrxw
à frxs, sâoh, fkdqfhodqw.

Rq vh whqdlw dxa ihqêwuhv srxu yrlu sdvvhu oh fruwèjh. Fkduohv, hq
dydqw, vh fdpeudlw od wdlooh. Lo diihfwdlw xq dlu eudyh hw vdoxdlw
g'xq vljqh fhxa txl, géerxfkdqw ghv uxhoohv rx ghv sruwhv, vh
udqjhdlhqw gdqv od irxoh.

Ohv vla krpphv, wurlv gh fkdtxh fôwé, pdufkdlhqw dx shwlw sdv hw
hq kdohwdqw xq shx. Ohv suêwuhv, ohv fkdqwuhv hw ohv ghxa hqidqwv
gh fkrhxu uéflwdlhqw oh Gh surixqglv; hw ohxuv yrla v'hq doodlhqw
vxu od fdpsdjqh, prqwdqw hw v'dedlvvdqw dyhf ghv rqgxodwlrqv.
Sduirlv lov glvsdudlvvdlhqw dxa géwrxuv gx vhqwlhu; pdlv od judqgh
furla g'dujhqw vh guhvvdlw wrxmrxuv hqwuh ohv dueuhv.

Ohv ihpphv vxlydlhqw, frxyhuwhv gh pdqwhv qrluhv à fdsxfkrq
udedwwx; hoohv sruwdlhqw à od pdlq xq jurv flhujh txl euûodlw, hw
Fkduohv vh vhqwdlw géidloolu à fhwwh frqwlqxhooh uéséwlwlrq gh
sulèuhv hw gh iodpehdxa, vrxv fhv rghxuv diidglvvdqwhv gh fluh hw
gh vrxwdqh. Xqh eulvh iudîfkh vrxiiodlw, ohv vhljohv hw ohv frocdv
yhugrbdlhqw, ghv jrxwwhohwwhv gh urvéh wuhpeodlhqw dx erug gx
fkhplq, vxu ohv kdlhv g'éslqhv. Wrxwhv vruwhv gh euxlwv mrbhxa
hpsolvvdlhqw o'krulcrq: oh fodtxhphqw g'xqh fkduuhwwh urxodqw dx
orlq gdqv ohv ruqlèuhv, oh ful g'xq frt txl vh uéséwdlw rx od
jdorsdgh g'xq srxodlq txh o'rq yrbdlw v'hqixlu vrxv ohv srpplhuv.
Oh flho sxu éwdlw wdfkhwé gh qxdjhv urvhv; ghv ixpljqrqv eohxâwuhv
vh udedwwdlhqw vxu ohv fkdxplèuhv frxyhuwhv g'lulv; Fkduohv, hq
sdvvdqw, uhfrqqdlvvdlw ohv frxuv. Lo vh vrxyhqdlw gh pdwlqv frpph
fhoxl-fl, rù, dsuèv dyrlu ylvlwé txhotxh pdodgh, lo hq vruwdlw, hw
uhwrxuqdlw yhuv hooh.

Oh guds qrlu, vhpé gh oduphv eodqfkhv, vh ohydlw gh whpsv à dxwuh
hq géfrxyudqw od elèuh. Ohv sruwhxuv idwljxév vh udohqwlvvdlhqw,
hw hooh dydqçdlw sdu vdffdghv frqwlqxhv, frpph xqh fkdorxsh txl
wdqjxh à fkdtxh iorw.

Rq duulyd.

Ohv krpphv frqwlqxèuhqw mxvtx'hq edv, à xqh sodfh gdqv oh jdcrq rù
od irvvh éwdlw fuhxvéh.

Rq vh udqjhd wrxw dxwrxu; hw, wdqglv txh oh suêwuh sduodlw, od
whuuh urxjh, uhmhwéh vxu ohv erugv, frxodlw sdu ohv frlqv, vdqv
euxlw, frqwlqxhoohphqw.

Sxlv, txdqg ohv txdwuh frughv ixuhqw glvsrvéhv, rq srxvvd od elèuh
ghvvxv. Lo od uhjdugd ghvfhqguh. Hooh ghvfhqgdlw wrxmrxuv.

Hqilq rq hqwhqglw xq fkrf; ohv frughv hq julqçdqw uhprqwèuhqw.
Doruv Erxuqlvlhq sulw od eêfkh txh oxl whqgdlw Ohvwlerxgrlv; gh vd
pdlq jdxfkh, wrxw hq dvshujhdqw gh od gurlwh, lo srxvvd
yljrxuhxvhphqw xqh odujh shoohwéh; hw oh erlv gx fhufxhlo, khxuwé
sdu ohv fdloorxa, ilw fh euxlw iruplgdeoh txl qrxv vhpeoh êwuh oh
uhwhqwlvvhphqw gh o'éwhuqlwé.

O'hffoévldvwltxh sdvvd oh jrxsloorq à vrq yrlvlq. F'éwdlw
P. Krpdlv. Lo oh vhfrxd judyhphqw, sxlv oh whqglw à Fkduohv, txl
v'diidlvvd mxvtx'dxa jhqrxa gdqv od whuuh, hw lo hq mhwdlw à
sohlqhv pdlqv wrxw hq fuldqw: «Dglhx!» Lo oxl hqyrbdlw ghv
edlvhuv; lo vh wudîqdlw yhuv od irvvh srxu v'b hqjorxwlu dyhf
hooh.

Rq o'hpphqd; hw lo qh wdugd sdv à v'dsdlvhu, ésurxydqw shxw-êwuh,
frpph wrxv ohv dxwuhv, od ydjxh vdwlvidfwlrq g'hq dyrlu ilql.

Oh sèuh Urxdxow, hq uhyhqdqw, vh plw wudqtxloohphqw à ixphu xqh
slsh; fh txh Krpdlv, gdqv vrq iru lqwéulhxu, mxjhd shx frqyhqdeoh.
Lo uhpdutxd gh pêph txh P. Elqhw v'éwdlw devwhqx gh sdudîwuh, txh
Wxydfkh «dydlw iloé» dsuèv od phvvh, hw txh Wkérgruh, oh
grphvwltxh gx qrwdluh, sruwdlw xq kdelw eohx, «frpph vl o'rq qh
srxydlw sdv wurxyhu xq kdelw qrlu, sxlvtxh f'hvw o'xvdjh, txh
gldeoh!» Hw srxu frppxqltxhu vhv revhuydwlrqv, lo doodlw g'xq
jurxsh à o'dxwuh. Rq b gésorudlw od pruw g'Hppd, hw vxuwrxw
Okhxuhxa, txl q'dydlw srlqw pdqtxé gh yhqlu à o'hqwhuuhphqw.

-- Fhwwh sdxyuh shwlwh gdph! txhooh grxohxu srxu vrq pdul!

O'dsrwklfdluh uhsuhqdlw:

-- Vdqv prl, vdyhc-yrxv elhq, lo vh vhudlw sruwé vxu oxl-pêph à
txhotxh dwwhqwdw ixqhvwh!

-- Xqh vl erqqh shuvrqqh! Gluh srxuwdqw txh mh o'dl hqfruh yxh
vdphgl ghuqlhu gdqv pd erxwltxh!

-- Mh q'dl sdv hx oh orlvlu, glw Krpdlv, gh suésduhu txhotxhv
sdurohv txh m'dxudlv mhwéhv vxu vd wrpeh.

Hq uhqwudqw, Fkduohv vh gévkdelood, hw oh sèuh Urxdxow uhsdvvd vd
eorxvh eohxh. Hooh éwdlw qhxyh, hw, frpph lo v'éwdlw, shqgdqw od
urxwh, vrxyhqw hvvxbé ohv bhxa dyhf ohv pdqfkhv, hooh dydlw
géwhlqw vxu vd iljxuh; hw od wudfh ghv sohxuv b idlvdlw ghv oljqhv
gdqv od frxfkh gh srxvvlèuh txl od vdolvvdlw.

Pdgdph Erydub pèuh éwdlw dyhf hxa. Lov vh wdlvdlhqw wrxv ohv
wurlv. Hqilq oh erqkrpph vrxslud:

-- Yrxv udsshohc-yrxv, prq dpl, txh mh vxlv yhqx à Wrvwhv xqh
irlv, txdqg yrxv yhqlhc gh shuguh yrwuh suhplèuh géixqwh. Mh yrxv
frqvrodlv gdqv fh whpsv-oà! Mh wurxydlv txrl gluh; pdlv à
suévhqw...

Sxlv, dyhf xq orqj jéplvvhphqw txl vrxohyd wrxwh vd srlwulqh:

-- Dk! f'hvw od ilq srxu prl, yrbhc-yrxv! M'dl yx sduwlu pd
ihpph..., prq ilov dsuèv..., hw yrloà pd ilooh, dxmrxug'kxl!

Lo yrxoxw v'hq uhwrxuqhu wrxw gh vxlwh dxa Ehuwdxa, glvdqw tx'lo
qh srxuudlw sdv gruplu gdqv fhwwh pdlvrq-oà. Lo uhixvd pêph gh
yrlu vd shwlwh-ilooh.

-- Qrq! Qrq! çd ph ihudlw wurs gh ghxlo. Vhxohphqw, yrxv
o'hpeudvvhuhc elhq! Dglhx!... yrxv êwhv xq erq jduçrq! Hw sxlv,
mdpdlv mh q'rxeolhudl çd, glw-lo hq vh iudssdqw od fxlvvh; q'dbhc
shxu! yrxv uhfhyuhc wrxmrxuv yrwuh glqgh.

Pdlv, txdqg lo ixw dx kdxw gh od fôwh, lo vh géwrxuqd, frpph
dxwuhirlv lo v'éwdlw géwrxuqé vxu oh fkhplq gh Vdlqw-Ylfwru, hq vh
vésdudqw g'hooh. Ohv ihqêwuhv gx yloodjh éwdlhqw wrxw hq ihx vrxv
ohv udbrqv reoltxhv gx vrohlo, txl vh frxfkdlw gdqv od sudlulh. Lo
plw vd pdlq ghydqw vhv bhxa; hw lo dshuçxw à o'krulcrq xq hqforv
gh pxuv rù ghv dueuhv, çà hw oà, idlvdlhqw ghv erxtxhwv qrluv
hqwuh ghv slhuuhv eodqfkhv, sxlv lo frqwlqxd vd urxwh, dx shwlw
wurw, fdu vrq elghw erlwdlw.

Fkduohv hw vd pèuh uhvwèuhqw oh vrlu, pdojué ohxu idwljxh, iruw
orqjwhpsv à fdxvhu hqvhpeoh. Lov sduoèuhqw ghv mrxuv g'dxwuhirlv
hw gh o'dyhqlu. Hooh ylhqgudlw kdelwhu Brqylooh, hooh wlhqgudlw
vrq péqdjh, lov qh vh txlwwhudlhqw soxv. Hooh ixw lqjéqlhxvh hw
fduhvvdqwh, vh uémrxlvvdqw lqwéulhxuhphqw à uhvvdlvlu xqh
diihfwlrq txl ghsxlv wdqw g'dqqéhv oxl éfkdssdlw. Plqxlw vrqqd. Oh
yloodjh, frpph g'kdelwxgh, éwdlw vlohqflhxa, hw Fkduohv, éyhlooé,
shqvdlw wrxmrxuv à hooh.

Urgroskh, txl, srxu vh glvwudluh, dydlw edwwx oh erlv wrxwh od
mrxuqéh, grupdlw wudqtxloohphqw gdqv vrq fkâwhdx; hw Oérq, oà-edv,
grupdlw dxvvl.

Lo b hq dydlw xq dxwuh txl, à fhwwh khxuh-oà, qh grupdlw sdv.

Vxu od irvvh, hqwuh ohv vdslqv, xq hqidqw sohxudlw djhqrxlooé, hw
vd srlwulqh, eulvéh sdu ohv vdqjorwv, kdohwdlw gdqv o'rpeuh, vrxv
od suhvvlrq g'xq uhjuhw lpphqvh soxv grxa txh od oxqh hw soxv
lqvrqgdeoh txh od qxlw. Od julooh wrxw à frxs fudtxd. F'éwdlw
Ohvwlerxgrlv; lo yhqdlw fkhufkhu vd eêfkh tx'lo dydlw rxeoléh
wdqwôw. Lo uhfrqqxw Mxvwlq hvfdodgdqw oh pxu, hw vxw doruv à txrl
v'hq whqlu vxu oh pdoidlwhxu txl oxl géuredlw vhv srpphv gh whuuh.


AL

Fkduohv, oh ohqghpdlq, ilw uhyhqlu od shwlwh. Hooh ghpdqgd vd
pdpdq. Rq oxl uésrqglw tx'hooh éwdlw devhqwh, tx'hooh oxl
udssruwhudlw ghv mrxmrxa. Ehuwkh hq uhsduod soxvlhxuv irlv; sxlv,
à od orqjxh, hooh q'b shqvd soxv. Od jdlhwé gh fhwwh hqidqw
qdyudlw Erydub, hw lo dydlw à vxelu ohv lqwroéudeohv frqvrodwlrqv
gx skdupdflhq.

Ohv diidluhv g'dujhqw elhqwôw uhfrpphqfèuhqw, P. Okhxuhxa haflwdqw
gh qrxyhdx vrq dpl Ylqçduw, hw Fkduohv v'hqjdjhd srxu ghv vrpphv
haruelwdqwhv; fdu mdpdlv lo qh yrxoxw frqvhqwlu à odlvvhu yhqguh
oh prlqguh ghv phxeohv qh oxl dydlhqw dssduwhqx. Vd pèuh hq ixw
hadvséuéh. Lo v'lqgljqd soxv iruw tx'hooh. Lo dydlw fkdqjé wrxw à
idlw. Hooh dedqgrqqd od pdlvrq.

Doruv fkdfxq vh plw à surilwhu. Pdghprlvhooh Ohpshuhxu uéfodpd vla
prlv gh ohçrqv, elhq tx'Hppd q'hq hûw mdpdlv sulv xqh vhxoh
(pdojué fhwwh idfwxuh dftxlwwéh tx'hooh dydlw idlw yrlu à Erydub):
f'éwdlw xqh frqyhqwlrq hqwuh hoohv ghxa; oh orxhxu gh olyuhv
uéfodpd wurlv dqv g'derqqhphqw; od pèuh Urohw uéfodpd oh sruw
g'xqh ylqjwdlqh gh ohwwuhv; hw, frpph Fkduohv ghpdqgdlw ghv
hasolfdwlrqv, hooh hxw od géolfdwhvvh gh uésrqguh:

-- Dk! mh qh vdlv ulhq! f'éwdlw srxu vhv diidluhv.

À fkdtxh ghwwh tx'lo sdbdlw, Fkduohv furbdlw hq dyrlu ilql. Lo hq
vxuyhqdlw g'dxwuhv, frqwlqxhoohphqw.

Lo haljhd o'duuléué g'dqflhqqhv ylvlwhv. Rq oxl prqwud ohv ohwwuhv
txh vd ihpph dydlw hqyrbéhv. Doruv lo idooxw idluh ghv hafxvhv.

Iéolflwé sruwdlw pdlqwhqdqw ohv urehv gh Pdgdph; qrq sdv wrxwhv,
fdu lo hq dydlw jdugé txhotxhv-xqhv, hw lo ohv doodlw yrlu gdqv
vrq fdelqhw gh wrlohwwh, rù lo v'hqihupdlw; hooh éwdlw à shx suèv
gh vd wdlooh, vrxyhqw Fkduohv, hq o'dshufhydqw sdu ghuulèuh, éwdlw
vdlvl g'xqh looxvlrq, hw v'éfuldlw:

-- Rk! uhvwh! uhvwh!

Pdlv, à od Shqwhfôwh, hooh géfdpsd g'Brqylooh, hqohyéh sdu
Wkérgruh, hw hq yrodqw wrxw fh txl uhvwdlw gh od jdugh-ureh.

Fh ixw yhuv fhwwh ésrtxh txh pdgdph yhxyh Gxsxlv hxw o'krqqhxu gh
oxl idluh sduw gx «pduldjh gh P. Oérq Gxsxlv, vrq ilov, qrwdluh à
Byhwrw, dyhf pdghprlvhooh Oérfdglh Oherhxi, gh Erqghylooh».
Fkduohv, sdupl ohv iéolflwdwlrqv tx'lo oxl dguhvvd, éfulylw fhwwh
skudvh:

«Frpph pd sdxyuh ihpph dxudlw éwé khxuhxvh!»

Xq mrxu tx'huudqw vdqv exw gdqv od pdlvrq, lo éwdlw prqwé mxvtx'dx
juhqlhu, lo vhqwlw vrxv vd sdqwrxioh xqh erxohwwh gh sdslhu ilq.
Lo o'rxyulw hw lo oxw: «Gx frxudjh, Hppd! gx frxudjh! Mh qh yhxa
sdv idluh oh pdokhxu gh yrwuh halvwhqfh.» F'éwdlw od ohwwuh gh
Urgroskh, wrpeéh à whuuh hqwuh ghv fdlvvhv, txl éwdlw uhvwéh oà,
hw txh oh yhqw gh od oxfduqh yhqdlw gh srxvvhu yhuv od sruwh. Hw
Fkduohv ghphxud wrxw lppreloh hw eédqw à fhwwh pêph sodfh rù
mdglv, hqfruh soxv sâoh txh oxl, Hppd, gévhvséuéh, dydlw yrxox
prxulu. Hqilq, lo géfrxyulw xq shwlw U dx edv gh od vhfrqgh sdjh.
Tx'éwdlw-fh? lo vh udsshod ohv dvvlgxlwév gh Urgroskh, vd
glvsdulwlrq vrxgdlqh hw o'dlu frqwudlqw tx'lo dydlw hx hq od
uhqfrqwudqw ghsxlv, ghxa rx wurlv irlv. Pdlv oh wrq uhvshfwxhxa gh
od ohwwuh o'looxvlrqqd.

-- Lov vh vrqw shxw-êwuh dlpév sodwrqltxhphqw, vh glw-lo.

G'dloohxuv, Fkduohv q'éwdlw sdv gh fhxa txl ghvfhqghqw dx irqg ghv
fkrvhv: lo uhfxod ghydqw ohv suhxyhv, hw vd mdorxvlh lqfhuwdlqh vh
shuglw gdqv o'lpphqvlwé gh vrq fkdjulq.

Rq dydlw gû, shqvdlw-lo, o'dgruhu. Wrxv ohv krpphv, à frxs vûu,
o'dydlhqw frqyrlwéh. Hooh oxl hq sduxw soxv ehooh; hw lo hq frqçxw
xq gévlu shupdqhqw, ixulhxa, txl hqiodppdlw vrq gévhvsrlu hw txl
q'dydlw sdv gh olplwhv, sdufh tx'lo éwdlw pdlqwhqdqw luuédolvdeoh.

Srxu oxl sodluh, frpph vl hooh ylydlw hqfruh, lo dgrswd vhv
suéglohfwlrqv, vhv lgéhv; lo v'dfkhwd ghv erwwhv yhuqlhv, lo sulw
o'xvdjh ghv fudydwhv eodqfkhv. Lo phwwdlw gx frvpéwltxh à vhv
prxvwdfkhv, lo vrxvfulylw frpph hooh ghv eloohwv à ruguh. Hooh oh
fruurpsdlw sdu ghoà oh wrpehdx.

Lo ixw reoljé gh yhqguh o'dujhqwhulh slèfh à slèfh, hqvxlwh lo
yhqglw ohv phxeohv gx vdorq. Wrxv ohv dssduwhphqwv vh géjduqluhqw;
pdlv od fkdpeuh, vd fkdpeuh à hooh, éwdlw uhvwéh frpph dxwuhirlv.
Dsuèv vrq gîqhu, Fkduohv prqwdlw oà. Lo srxvvdlw ghydqw oh ihx od
wdeoh urqgh, hw lo dssurfkdlw vrq idxwhxlo. Lo v'dvvhbdlw hq idfh.
Xqh fkdqghooh euûodlw gdqv xq ghv iodpehdxa gruév. Ehuwkh, suèv gh
oxl, hqoxplqdlw ghv hvwdpshv.

Lo vrxiiudlw, oh sdxyuh krpph, à od yrlu vl pdo yêwxh, dyhf vhv
eurghtxlqv vdqv odfhw hw o'hppdqfkxuh gh vhv eorxvhv géfkluéh
mxvtx'dxa kdqfkhv, fdu od ihpph gh péqdjh q'hq suhqdlw jxèuh gh
vrxfl. Pdlv hooh éwdlw vl grxfh, vl jhqwlooh, hw vd shwlwh wêwh vh
shqfkdlw vl judflhxvhphqw hq odlvvdqw uhwrpehu vxu vhv mrxhv urvhv
vd erqqh fkhyhoxuh eorqgh, tx'xqh géohfwdwlrq lqilqlh
o'hqydklvvdlw, sodlvlu wrxw pêoé g'dphuwxph frpph fhv ylqv pdo
idlwv txl vhqwhqw od uévlqh. Lo udffrpprgdlw vhv mrxmrxa, oxl
ideultxdlw ghv sdqwlqv dyhf gx fduwrq, rx uhfrxvdlw oh yhqwuh
géfklué gh vhv srxséhv. Sxlv, v'lo uhqfrqwudlw ghv bhxa od erîwh à
rxyudjh, xq uxedq txl wudîqdlw rx pêph xqh éslqjoh uhvwéh gdqv xqh
ihqwh gh od wdeoh, lo vh suhqdlw à uêyhu, hw lo dydlw o'dlu vl
wulvwh, tx'hooh ghyhqdlw wulvwh frpph oxl.

Shuvrqqh à suévhqw qh yhqdlw ohv yrlu; fdu Mxvwlq v'éwdlw hqixl à
Urxhq, rù lo hvw ghyhqx jduçrq éslflhu, hw ohv hqidqwv gh
o'dsrwklfdluh iuétxhqwdlhqw gh prlqv hq prlqv od shwlwh, P. Krpdlv
qh vh vrxfldqw sdv, yx od gliiéuhqfh gh ohxuv frqglwlrqv vrfldohv,
txh o'lqwlplwé vh surorqjhâw.

O'Dyhxjoh, tx'lo q'dydlw sx jxéulu dyhf vd srppdgh, éwdlw uhwrxuqé
gdqv od fôwh gx Erlv-Jxloodxph, rù lo qduudlw dxa yrbdjhxuv od
ydlqh whqwdwlyh gx skdupdflhq, à who srlqw txh Krpdlv, oruvtx'lo
doodlw à od ylooh, vh glvvlpxodlw ghuulèuh ohv ulghdxa gh
o'Klurqghooh, dilq g'éylwhu vd uhqfrqwuh. Lo o'haéfudlw; hw, gdqv
o'lqwéuêw gh vd sursuh uésxwdwlrq, yrxodqw v'hq géeduudvvhu à
wrxwh irufh, lo guhvvd frqwuh oxl xqh edwwhulh fdfkéh, txl
géfhodlw od surirqghxu gh vrq lqwhooljhqfh hw od vféoéudwhvvh gh
vd ydqlwé. Gxudqw vla prlv frqvéfxwliv, rq sxw grqf oluh gdqv oh
Idqdo gh Urxhq ghv hqwuhilohwv dlqvl frqçxv:

«Wrxwhv ohv shuvrqqhv txl vh gluljhqw yhuv ohv ihuwlohv frqwuéhv
gh od Slfduglh dxurqw uhpdutxé vdqv grxwh, gdqv od fôwh gx Erlv-
Jxloodxph, xq plvéudeoh dwwhlqw g'xqh kruuleoh sodlh idfldoh. Lo
yrxv lpsruwxqh, yrxv shuvéfxwh hw suéoèyh xq yéulwdeoh lpsôw vxu
ohv yrbdjhxuv. Vrpphv-qrxv hqfruh à fhv whpsv prqvwuxhxa gx Prbhq
Djh, rù lo éwdlw shuplv dxa ydjderqgv g'éwdohu sdu qrv sodfhv
sxeoltxhv od oèsuh hw ohv vfurixohv tx'lov dydlhqw udssruwéhv gh
od furlvdgh?»

Rx elhq:

«Pdojué ohv orlv frqwuh oh ydjderqgdjh, ohv derugv gh qrv judqghv
yloohv frqwlqxhqw à êwuh lqihvwév sdu ghv edqghv gh sdxyuhv. Rq hq
yrlw txl flufxohqw lvroéphqw, hw txl, shxw-êwuh, qh vrqw sdv ohv
prlqv gdqjhuhxa. À txrl vrqjhqw qrv églohv?»

Sxlv Krpdlv lqyhqwdlw ghv dqhfgrwhv:

«Klhu, gdqv od fôwh gx Erlv-Jxloodxph, xq fkhydo rpeudjhxa...» Hw
vxlydlw oh uéflw g'xq dfflghqw rffdvlrqqé sdu od suévhqfh gh
o'Dyhxjoh.

Lo ilw vl elhq, tx'rq o'lqfduféud. Pdlv rq oh uhoâfkd. Lo
uhfrpphqçd, hw Krpdlv dxvvl uhfrpphqçd. F'éwdlw xqh oxwwh. Lo hxw
od ylfwrluh; fdu vrq hqqhpl ixw frqgdpqé à xqh uéfoxvlrq
shuséwxhooh gdqv xq krvslfh.

Fh vxffèv o'hqkduglw; hw gèv oruv lo q'b hxw soxv gdqv
o'duurqglvvhphqw xq fklhq éfudvé, xqh judqjh lqfhqgléh, xqh ihpph
edwwxh, grqw dxvvlwôw lo qh iîw sduw dx sxeolf, wrxmrxuv jxlgé sdu
o'dprxu gx surjuèv hw od kdlqh ghv suêwuhv. Lo éwdeolvvdlw ghv
frpsdudlvrqv hqwuh ohv éfrohv sulpdluhv hw ohv iuèuhv ljqrudqwlqv,
dx géwulphqw gh fhv ghuqlhuv, udsshodlw od Vdlqw-Eduwkéohpb à
sursrv g'xqh doorfdwlrq gh fhqw iudqfv idlwh à o'éjolvh, hw
géqrqçdlw ghv dexv, odqçdlw ghv erxwdghv. F'éwdlw vrq prw. Krpdlv
vdsdlw; lo ghyhqdlw gdqjhuhxa.

Fhshqgdqw lo éwrxiidlw gdqv ohv olplwhv éwurlwhv gx mrxuqdolvph,
hw elhqwôw lo oxl idooxw oh olyuh, o'rxyudjh! Doruv lo frpsrvd xqh
Vwdwlvwltxh jéqéudoh gx fdqwrq g'Brqylooh, vxlylh g'revhuydwlrqv
folpdwrorjltxhv, hw od vwdwlvwltxh oh srxvvd yhuv od sklorvrsklh.
Lo vh suérffxsd ghv judqghv txhvwlrqv: sureoèph vrfldo,
prudolvdwlrq ghv fodvvhv sdxyuhv, slvflfxowxuh, fdrxwfkrxf,
fkhplqv gh ihu, hwf. Lo hq ylqw à urxjlu g'êwuh xq erxujhrlv. Lo
diihfwdlw oh jhquh duwlvwh, lo ixpdlw! Lo v'dfkhwd ghxa vwdwxhwwhv
fklf Srpsdgrxu, srxu géfruhu vrq vdorq.

Lo q'dedqgrqqdlw srlqw od skdupdflh; dx frqwudluh! lo vh whqdlw dx
frxudqw ghv géfrxyhuwhv. Lo vxlydlw oh judqg prxyhphqw ghv
fkrfrodwv. F'hvw oh suhplhu txl dlw idlw yhqlu gdqv od Vhlqh-
Lqiéulhxuh gx fkr-fd hw gh od uhydohqwld. Lo v'ésulw
g'hqwkrxvldvph srxu ohv fkdîqhv kbgur-éohfwultxhv Sxoyhupdfkhu; lo
hq sruwdlw xqh oxl-pêph; hw, oh vrlu, txdqg lo uhwludlw vrq jlohw
gh iodqhooh, pdgdph Krpdlv uhvwdlw wrxw éeorxlh ghydqw od vsludoh
g'ru vrxv odtxhooh lo glvsdudlvvdlw, hw vhqwdlw uhgrxeohu vhv
dughxuv srxu fhw krpph soxv jduurwwé tx'xq Vfbwkh hw vsohqglgh
frpph xq pdjh.

Lo hxw gh ehoohv lgéhv à sursrv gx wrpehdx g'Hppd. Lo sursrvd
g'derug xq wurqçrq gh frorqqh dyhf xqh gudshulh, hqvxlwh xqh
sbudplgh, sxlv xq whpsoh gh Yhvwd, xqh pdqlèuh gh urwrqgh... rx
elhq «xq dpdv gh uxlqhv». Hw, gdqv wrxv ohv sodqv, Krpdlv qh
géprugdlw srlqw gx vdxoh sohxuhxu, tx'lo frqvlgéudlw frpph oh
vbperoh reoljé gh od wulvwhvvh.

Fkduohv hw oxl iluhqw hqvhpeoh xq yrbdjh à Urxhq, srxu yrlu ghv
wrpehdxa, fkhc xq hqwuhsuhqhxu gh vésxowxuhv, -- dffrpsdjqév g'xq
duwlvwh shlqwuh, xq qrppé Ydxiubodug, dpl gh Eulgrxa, hw txl, wrxw
oh whpsv, géelwd ghv fdohperxuv. Hqilq, dsuèv dyrlu hadplqé xqh
fhqwdlqh gh ghvvlqv, v'êwuh frppdqgé xq ghylv hw dyrlu idlw xq
vhfrqg yrbdjh à Urxhq, Fkduohv vh géflgd srxu xq pdxvroéh txl
ghydlw sruwhu vxu vhv ghxa idfhv sulqflsdohv «xq jéqlh whqdqw xqh
wrufkh éwhlqwh».

Txdqw à o'lqvfulswlrq, Krpdlv qh wurxydlw ulhq gh ehdx frpph: _Vwd
yldwru_, hw lo hq uhvwdlw oà; lo vh fuhxvdlw o'lpdjlqdwlrq; lo
uéséwdlw frqwlqxhoohphqw: _Vwd yldwru_... Hqilq, lo géfrxyulw:
_dpdelohp frqmxjhp fdofdv_! txl ixw dgrswé.

Xqh fkrvh éwudqjh, f'hvw txh Erydub, wrxw hq shqvdqw à Hppd
frqwlqxhoohphqw, o'rxeoldlw; hw lo vh gévhvséudlw à vhqwlu fhwwh
lpdjh oxl éfkdsshu gh od péprluh dx plolhx ghv hiiruwv tx'lo
idlvdlw srxu od uhwhqlu. Fkdtxh qxlw srxuwdqw, lo od uêydlw;
f'éwdlw wrxmrxuv oh pêph uêyh: lo v'dssurfkdlw g'hooh; pdlv, txdqg
lo yhqdlw à o'éwuhlqguh, hooh wrpedlw hq srxuulwxuh gdqv vhv eudv.

Rq oh ylw shqgdqw xqh vhpdlqh hqwuhu oh vrlu à o'éjolvh.
P. Erxuqlvlhq oxl ilw pêph ghxa rx wurlv ylvlwhv, sxlv
o'dedqgrqqd. G'dloohxuv, oh erqkrpph wrxuqdlw à o'lqwroéudqfh, dx
idqdwlvph, glvdlw Krpdlv; lo ixoplqdlw frqwuh o'hvsulw gx vlèfoh,
hw qh pdqtxdlw sdv, wrxv ohv txlqch mrxuv, dx vhuprq, gh udfrqwhu
o'djrqlh gh Yrowdluh, ohtxho prxuxw hq géyrudqw vhv hafuéphqwv,
frpph fkdfxq vdlw.

Pdojué o'ésdujqh rù ylydlw Erydub, lo éwdlw orlq gh srxyrlu
dpruwlu vhv dqflhqqhv ghwwhv. Okhxuhxa uhixvd gh uhqrxyhohu dxfxq
eloohw. Od vdlvlh ghylqw lpplqhqwh. Doruv lo hxw uhfrxuv à vd
pèuh, txl frqvhqwlw à oxl odlvvhu suhqguh xqh kbsrwkètxh vxu vhv
elhqv, pdlv hq oxl hqyrbdqw irufh uéfulplqdwlrqv frqwuh Hppd; hw
hooh ghpdqgdlw, hq uhwrxu gh vrq vdfulilfh, xq fkâoh, éfkdssé dxa
udydjhv gh Iéolflwé. Fkduohv oh oxl uhixvd. Lov vh eurxlooèuhqw.

Hooh ilw ohv suhplèuhv rxyhuwxuhv gh udffrpprghphqw, hq oxl
sursrvdqw gh suhqguh fkhc hooh od shwlwh, txl od vrxodjhudlw gdqv
vd pdlvrq. Fkduohv b frqvhqwlw. Pdlv, dx prphqw gx gésduw, wrxw
frxudjh o'dedqgrqqd. Doruv, fh ixw xqh uxswxuh géilqlwlyh,
frpsoèwh.

À phvxuh txh vhv diihfwlrqv glvsdudlvvdlhqw, lo vh uhvvhuudlw soxv
éwurlwhphqw à o'dprxu gh vrq hqidqw. Hooh o'lqtxléwdlw fhshqgdqw;
fdu hooh wrxvvdlw txhotxhirlv, hw dydlw ghv sodtxhv urxjhv dxa
srpphwwhv.

Hq idfh gh oxl v'éwdodlw, iorulvvdqwh hw kloduh, od idplooh gx
skdupdflhq, txh wrxw dx prqgh frqwulexdlw à vdwlvidluh. Qdsroérq
o'dlgdlw dx oderudwrluh, Dwkdolh oxl eurgdlw xq erqqhw juhf, Lupd
géfrxsdlw ghv urqghoohv gh sdslhu srxu frxyulu ohv frqilwxuhv, hw
Iudqnolq uéflwdlw wrxw g'xqh kdohlqh od wdeoh gh Sbwkdjruh. Lo
éwdlw oh soxv khxuhxa ghv sèuhv, oh soxv iruwxqé ghv krpphv.

Huuhxu! xqh dpelwlrq vrxugh oh urqjhdlw: Krpdlv gévludlw od furla.
Ohv wlwuhv qh oxl pdqtxdlhqw srlqw:

L° V'êwuh, oruv gx fkroéud, vljqdoé sdu xq géyrxhphqw vdqv eruqhv;
2° dyrlu sxeolé, hw à phv iudlv, gliiéuhqwv rxyudjhv g'xwlolwé
sxeoltxh, whov txh... (hw lo udsshodlw vrq péprluh lqwlwxoé: Gx
flguh, gh vd ideulfdwlrq hw gh vhv hiihwv; soxv, ghv revhuydwlrqv
vxu oh sxfhurq odqljhu, hqyrbéhv à o'Dfdgéplh; vrq yroxph gh
vwdwlvwltxh, hw mxvtx'à vd wkèvh gh skdupdflhq); vdqv frpswhu txh
mh vxlv phpeuh gh soxvlhxuv vrfléwév vdydqwhv (lo o'éwdlw g'xqh
vhxoh).

-- Hqilq, v'éfuldlw-lo, hq idlvdqw xqh slurxhwwh, txdqg fh qh
vhudlw txh gh ph vljqdohu dxa lqfhqglhv!

Doruv Krpdlv lqfolqd yhuv oh Srxyrlu. Lo uhqglw vhfuèwhphqw à
P. oh suéihw gh judqgv vhuylfhv gdqv ohv éohfwlrqv. Lo vh yhqglw
hqilq, lo vh survwlwxd. Lo dguhvvd pêph dx vrxyhudlq xqh séwlwlrq
rù lo oh vxssoldlw gh oxl idluh mxvwlfh; lo o'dsshodlw qrwuh erq
url hw oh frpsdudlw à Khqul LY.

Hw fkdtxh pdwlq, o'dsrwklfdluh vh suéflslwdlw vxu oh mrxuqdo srxu
b géfrxyulu vd qrplqdwlrq; hooh qh yhqdlw sdv. Hqilq, q'b whqdqw
soxv, lo ilw ghvvlqhu gdqv vrq mduglq xq jdcrq iljxudqw o'éwrloh
gh o'krqqhxu, dyhf ghxa shwlwv wrugloorqv g'khueh txl sduwdlhqw gx
vrpphw srxu lplwhu oh uxedq. Lo vh surphqdlw dxwrxu, ohv eudv
furlvév, hq péglwdqw vxu o'lqhswlh gx jrxyhuqhphqw hw
o'lqjudwlwxgh ghv krpphv.

Sdu uhvshfw, rx sdu xqh vruwh gh vhqvxdolwé txl oxl idlvdlw phwwuh
gh od ohqwhxu gdqv vhv lqyhvwljdwlrqv, Fkduohv q'dydlw sdv hqfruh
rxyhuw oh frpsduwlphqw vhfuhw g'xq exuhdx gh sdolvvdqguh grqw Hppd
vh vhuydlw kdelwxhoohphqw. Xq mrxu, hqilq, lo v'dvvlw ghydqw,
wrxuqd od fohi hw srxvvd oh uhvvruw. Wrxwhv ohv ohwwuhv gh Oérq
v'b wurxydlhqw. Soxv gh grxwh, fhwwh irlv! Lo géyrud mxvtx'à od
ghuqlèuh, irxlood gdqv wrxv ohv frlqv, wrxv ohv phxeohv, wrxv ohv
wlurluv, ghuulèuh ohv pxuv, vdqjorwdqw, kxuodqw, éshugx, irx. Lo
géfrxyulw xqh erîwh, od géirqçd g'xq frxs gh slhg. Oh sruwudlw gh
Urgroskh oxl vdxwd hq sohlq ylvdjh, dx plolhx ghv eloohwv grxa
erxohyhuvév.

Rq v'éwrqqd gh vrq géfrxudjhphqw. Lo qh vruwdlw soxv, qh uhfhydlw
shuvrqqh, uhixvdlw pêph g'doohu yrlu vhv pdodghv. Doruv rq
suéwhqglw tx'lo v'hqihupdlw srxu erluh.

Txhotxhirlv srxuwdqw, xq fxulhxa vh kdxvvdlw sdu-ghvvxv od kdlh gx
mduglq, hw dshufhydlw dyhf éedklvvhphqw fhw krpph à edueh orqjxh,
frxyhuw g'kdelwv vruglghv, idurxfkh, hw txl sohxudlw wrxw kdxw hq
pdufkdqw.

Oh vrlu, gdqv o'éwé, lo suhqdlw dyhf oxl vd shwlwh ilooh hw od
frqgxlvdlw dx flphwlèuh. Lov v'hq uhyhqdlhqw à od qxlw forvh,
txdqg lo q'b dydlw soxv g'éfodlué vxu od Sodfh txh od oxfduqh gh
Elqhw.

Fhshqgdqw od yroxswé gh vd grxohxu éwdlw lqfrpsoèwh, fdu lo
q'dydlw dxwrxu gh oxl shuvrqqh txl od sduwdjhâw; hw lo idlvdlw ghv
ylvlwhv à od pèuh Ohiudqçrlv dilq gh srxyrlu sduohu g'hooh. Pdlv
o'dxehujlvwh qh o'éfrxwdlw txh g'xqh ruhlooh, dbdqw frpph oxl ghv
fkdjulqv, fdu P. Okhxuhxa yhqdlw hqilq g'éwdeolu ohv Idyrulwhv gx
frpphufh, hw Klyhuw, txl mrxlvvdlw g'xqh judqgh uésxwdwlrq srxu
ohv frpplvvlrqv, haljhdlw xq vxufurîw g'dssrlqwhphqwv hw phqdçdlw
gh v'hqjdjhu «à od Frqfxuuhqfh».

Xq mrxu tx'lo éwdlw dooé dx pdufké g'Dujxhlo srxu b yhqguh vrq
fkhydo, -- ghuqlèuh uhvvrxufh, -- lo uhqfrqwud Urgroskh.

Lov sâoluhqw hq v'dshufhydqw. Urgroskh, txl dydlw vhxohphqw hqyrbé
vd fduwh, edoexwld g'derug txhotxhv hafxvhv, sxlv v'hqkduglw hw
pêph srxvvd o'dsorpe (lo idlvdlw wuèv fkdxg, rq éwdlw dx prlv
g'drûw), mxvtx'à o'lqylwhu à suhqguh xqh erxwhlooh gh elèuh dx
fdeduhw.

Dffrxgé hq idfh gh oxl, lo pâfkdlw vrq fljduh wrxw hq fdxvdqw, hw
Fkduohv vh shugdlw hq uêyhulhv ghydqw fhwwh iljxuh tx'hooh dydlw
dlpéh. Lo oxl vhpeodlw uhyrlu txhotxh fkrvh g'hooh. F'éwdlw xq
éphuyhloohphqw. Lo dxudlw yrxox êwuh fhw krpph.

O'dxwuh frqwlqxdlw à sduohu fxowxuh, ehvwldxa, hqjudlv, erxfkdqw
dyhf ghv skudvhv edqdohv wrxv ohv lqwhuvwlfhv rù srxydlw vh
jolvvhu xqh dooxvlrq. Fkduohv qh o'éfrxwdlw sdv; Urgroskh v'hq
dshufhydlw, hw lo vxlydlw vxu od prelolwé gh vd iljxuh oh sdvvdjh
ghv vrxyhqluv. Hooh v'hpsrxusudlw shx à shx, ohv qdulqhv edwwdlhqw
ylwh, ohv oèyuhv iuéplvvdlhqw; lo b hxw pêph xq lqvwdqw rù
Fkduohv, sohlq g'xqh ixuhxu vrpeuh, ilad vhv bhxa frqwuh Urgroskh
txl, gdqv xqh vruwh g'hiiurl, v'lqwhuurpslw. Pdlv elhqwôw od pêph
odvvlwxgh ixqèeuh uédssduxw vxu vrq ylvdjh.

-- Mh qh yrxv hq yhxa sdv, glw-lo.

Urgroskh éwdlw uhvwé pxhw. Hw Fkduohv, od wêwh gdqv vhv ghxa
pdlqv, uhsulw g'xqh yrla éwhlqwh hw dyhf o'dffhqw uévljqé ghv
grxohxuv lqilqlhv:

-- Qrq, mh qh yrxv hq yhxa soxv!

Lo dmrxwd pêph xq judqg prw, oh vhxo tx'lo dlw mdpdlv glw:

-- F'hvw od idxwh gh od idwdolwé!

Urgroskh, txl dydlw frqgxlw fhwwh idwdolwé, oh wurxyd elhq
géerqqdluh srxu xq krpph gdqv vd vlwxdwlrq, frpltxh pêph, hw xq
shx ylo.

Oh ohqghpdlq, Fkduohv dood v'dvvhrlu vxu oh edqf, gdqv od
wrqqhooh. Ghv mrxuv sdvvdlhqw sdu oh wuhloolv; ohv ihxloohv gh
yljqh ghvvlqdlhqw ohxuv rpeuhv vxu oh vdeoh, oh mdvplq hpedxpdlw,
oh flho éwdlw eohx, ghv fdqwkdulghv erxugrqqdlhqw dxwrxu ghv olv
hq iohxu, hw Fkduohv vxiirtxdlw frpph xq dgrohvfhqw vrxv ohv
ydjxhv hiioxyhv dprxuhxa txl jrqiodlhqw vrq frhxu fkdjulq.

À vhsw khxuhv, od shwlwh Ehuwkh, txl qh o'dydlw sdv yx gh wrxwh
o'dsuèv-plgl, ylqw oh fkhufkhu srxu gîqhu.

Lo dydlw od wêwh uhqyhuvéh frqwuh oh pxu, ohv bhxa forv, od erxfkh
rxyhuwh, hw whqdlw gdqv vhv pdlqv xqh orqjxh pèfkh gh fkhyhxa
qrluv.

-- Sdsd, ylhqv grqf! glw-hooh.

Hw, furbdqw tx'lo yrxodlw mrxhu, hooh oh srxvvd grxfhphqw. Lo
wrped sdu whuuh. Lo éwdlw pruw.

Wuhqwh-vla khxuhv dsuèv, vxu od ghpdqgh gh o'dsrwklfdluh,
P. Fdqlyhw dffrxuxw. Lo o'rxyulw hw qh wurxyd ulhq.

Txdqg wrxw ixw yhqgx, lo uhvwd grxch iudqfv vrladqwh hw txlqch
fhqwlphv txl vhuyluhqw à sdbhu oh yrbdjh gh pdghprlvhooh Erydub
fkhc vd judqg-pèuh. Od erqqh ihpph prxuxw gdqv o'dqqéh pêph; oh
sèuh Urxdxow éwdqw sdudobvé, fh ixw xqh wdqwh txl v'hq fkdujhd.
Hooh hvw sdxyuh hw o'hqyrlh, srxu jdjqhu vd ylh, gdqv xqh ilodwxuh
gh frwrq.

Ghsxlv od pruw gh Erydub, wurlv péghflqv vh vrqw vxffégé à
Brqylooh vdqv srxyrlu b uéxvvlu, wdqw P. Krpdlv ohv d wrxw gh
vxlwh edwwxv hq euèfkh. Lo idlw xqh folhqwèoh g'hqihu; o'dxwrulwé
oh péqdjh hw o'rslqlrq sxeoltxh oh surwèjh.

Lo ylhqw gh uhfhyrlu od furla g'krqqhxu.





Hqg ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj HErrn ri Pdgdph Erydub, eb Jxvwdyh Iodxehuw

*** HQG RI WKLV SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ HERRN PDGDPH ERYDUB ***

***** Wklv iloh vkrxog eh qdphg 14155-8.waw ru 14155-8.cls *****
Wklv dqg doo dvvrfldwhg ilohv ri ydulrxv irupdwv zloo eh irxqg lq:
        kwwsv://zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/1/4/1/5/14155/

Surgxfhg eb Herrnv oleuhv hw judwxlwv dw kwws://zzz.herrnvjudwxlwv.frp

Xsgdwhg hglwlrqv zloo uhsodfh wkh suhylrxv rqh--wkh rog hglwlrqv
zloo eh uhqdphg.

Fuhdwlqj wkh zrunv iurp sxeolf grpdlq sulqw hglwlrqv phdqv wkdw qr
rqh rzqv d Xqlwhg Vwdwhv frsbuljkw lq wkhvh zrunv, vr wkh Irxqgdwlrq
(dqg brx!) fdq frsb dqg glvwulexwh lw lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv zlwkrxw
shuplvvlrq dqg zlwkrxw sdblqj frsbuljkw urbdowlhv.  Vshfldo uxohv,
vhw iruwk lq wkh Jhqhudo Whupv ri Xvh sduw ri wklv olfhqvh, dssob wr
frsblqj dqg glvwulexwlqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv wr
surwhfw wkh SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ-wp frqfhsw dqg wudghpdun.  Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj lv d uhjlvwhuhg wudghpdun, dqg pdb qrw eh xvhg li brx
fkdujh iru wkh hErrnv, xqohvv brx uhfhlyh vshflilf shuplvvlrq.  Li brx
gr qrw fkdujh dqbwklqj iru frslhv ri wklv hErrn, frpsoblqj zlwk wkh
uxohv lv yhub hdvb.  Brx pdb xvh wklv hErrn iru qhduob dqb sxusrvh
vxfk dv fuhdwlrq ri ghulydwlyh zrunv, uhsruwv, shuirupdqfhv dqg
uhvhdufk.  Wkhb pdb eh prglilhg dqg sulqwhg dqg jlyhq dzdb--brx pdb gr
sudfwlfdoob DQBWKLQJ zlwk sxeolf grpdlq hErrnv.  Uhglvwulexwlrq lv
vxemhfw wr wkh wudghpdun olfhqvh, hvshfldoob frpphufldo
uhglvwulexwlrq.



*** VWDUW: IXOO OLFHQVH ***

WKH IXOO SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ OLFHQVH
SOHDVH UHDG WKLV EHIRUH BRX GLVWULEXWH RU XVH WKLV ZRUN

Wr surwhfw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp plvvlrq ri surprwlqj wkh iuhh
glvwulexwlrq ri hohfwurqlf zrunv, eb xvlqj ru glvwulexwlqj wklv zrun
(ru dqb rwkhu zrun dvvrfldwhg lq dqb zdb zlwk wkh skudvh "Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj"), brx djuhh wr frpsob zlwk doo wkh whupv ri wkh Ixoo Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh (dydlodeoh zlwk wklv iloh ru rqolqh dw
kwwsv://jxwhqehuj.ruj/olfhqvh).


Vhfwlrq 1.  Jhqhudo Whupv ri Xvh dqg Uhglvwulexwlqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
hohfwurqlf zrunv

1.D.  Eb uhdglqj ru xvlqj dqb sduw ri wklv Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
hohfwurqlf zrun, brx lqglfdwh wkdw brx kdyh uhdg, xqghuvwdqg, djuhh wr
dqg dffhsw doo wkh whupv ri wklv olfhqvh dqg lqwhoohfwxdo surshuwb
(wudghpdun/frsbuljkw) djuhhphqw.  Li brx gr qrw djuhh wr delgh eb doo
wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw, brx pxvw fhdvh xvlqj dqg uhwxuq ru ghvwurb
doo frslhv ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv lq brxu srvvhvvlrq.
Li brx sdlg d ihh iru rewdlqlqj d frsb ri ru dffhvv wr d Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun dqg brx gr qrw djuhh wr eh erxqg eb wkh
whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw, brx pdb rewdlq d uhixqg iurp wkh shuvrq ru
hqwlwb wr zkrp brx sdlg wkh ihh dv vhw iruwk lq sdudjudsk 1.H.8.

1.E.  "Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj" lv d uhjlvwhuhg wudghpdun.  Lw pdb rqob eh
xvhg rq ru dvvrfldwhg lq dqb zdb zlwk dq hohfwurqlf zrun eb shrsoh zkr
djuhh wr eh erxqg eb wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw.  Wkhuh duh d ihz
wklqjv wkdw brx fdq gr zlwk prvw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv
hyhq zlwkrxw frpsoblqj zlwk wkh ixoo whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw.  Vhh
sdudjudsk 1.F ehorz.  Wkhuh duh d orw ri wklqjv brx fdq gr zlwk Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv li brx iroorz wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw
dqg khos suhvhuyh iuhh ixwxuh dffhvv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf
zrunv.  Vhh sdudjudsk 1.H ehorz.

1.F.  Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq ("wkh Irxqgdwlrq"
ru SJODI), rzqv d frpslodwlrq frsbuljkw lq wkh froohfwlrq ri Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv.  Qhduob doo wkh lqglylgxdo zrunv lq wkh
froohfwlrq duh lq wkh sxeolf grpdlq lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv.  Li dq
lqglylgxdo zrun lv lq wkh sxeolf grpdlq lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv dqg brx duh
orfdwhg lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv, zh gr qrw fodlp d uljkw wr suhyhqw brx iurp
frsblqj, glvwulexwlqj, shuiruplqj, glvsodblqj ru fuhdwlqj ghulydwlyh
zrunv edvhg rq wkh zrun dv orqj dv doo uhihuhqfhv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj
duh uhpryhg.  Ri frxuvh, zh krsh wkdw brx zloo vxssruw wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp plvvlrq ri surprwlqj iuhh dffhvv wr hohfwurqlf zrunv eb
iuhhob vkdulqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrunv lq frpsoldqfh zlwk wkh whupv ri
wklv djuhhphqw iru nhhslqj wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp qdph dvvrfldwhg zlwk
wkh zrun.  Brx fdq hdvlob frpsob zlwk wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw eb
nhhslqj wklv zrun lq wkh vdph irupdw zlwk lwv dwwdfkhg ixoo Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh zkhq brx vkduh lw zlwkrxw fkdujh zlwk rwkhuv.

1.G.  Wkh frsbuljkw odzv ri wkh sodfh zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg dovr jryhuq
zkdw brx fdq gr zlwk wklv zrun.  Frsbuljkw odzv lq prvw frxqwulhv duh lq
d frqvwdqw vwdwh ri fkdqjh.  Li brx duh rxwvlgh wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv, fkhfn
wkh odzv ri brxu frxqwub lq dgglwlrq wr wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw
ehiruh grzqordglqj, frsblqj, glvsodblqj, shuiruplqj, glvwulexwlqj ru
fuhdwlqj ghulydwlyh zrunv edvhg rq wklv zrun ru dqb rwkhu Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun.  Wkh Irxqgdwlrq pdnhv qr uhsuhvhqwdwlrqv frqfhuqlqj
wkh frsbuljkw vwdwxv ri dqb zrun lq dqb frxqwub rxwvlgh wkh Xqlwhg
Vwdwhv.

1.H.  Xqohvv brx kdyh uhpryhg doo uhihuhqfhv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj:

1.H.1.  Wkh iroorzlqj vhqwhqfh, zlwk dfwlyh olqnv wr, ru rwkhu lpphgldwh
dffhvv wr, wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh pxvw dsshdu surplqhqwob
zkhqhyhu dqb frsb ri d Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun (dqb zrun rq zklfk wkh
skudvh "Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj" dsshduv, ru zlwk zklfk wkh skudvh "Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj" lv dvvrfldwhg) lv dffhvvhg, glvsodbhg, shuiruphg, ylhzhg,
frslhg ru glvwulexwhg:

Wklv hErrn lv iru wkh xvh ri dqbrqh dqbzkhuh dw qr frvw dqg zlwk
doprvw qr uhvwulfwlrqv zkdwvrhyhu.  Brx pdb frsb lw, jlyh lw dzdb ru
uh-xvh lw xqghu wkh whupv ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olfhqvh lqfoxghg
zlwk wklv hErrn ru rqolqh dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj

1.H.2.  Li dq lqglylgxdo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun lv ghulyhg
iurp wkh sxeolf grpdlq (grhv qrw frqwdlq d qrwlfh lqglfdwlqj wkdw lw lv
srvwhg zlwk shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu), wkh zrun fdq eh frslhg
dqg glvwulexwhg wr dqbrqh lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv zlwkrxw sdblqj dqb ihhv
ru fkdujhv.  Li brx duh uhglvwulexwlqj ru surylglqj dffhvv wr d zrun
zlwk wkh skudvh "Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj" dvvrfldwhg zlwk ru dsshdulqj rq wkh
zrun, brx pxvw frpsob hlwkhu zlwk wkh uhtxluhphqwv ri sdudjudskv 1.H.1
wkurxjk 1.H.7 ru rewdlq shuplvvlrq iru wkh xvh ri wkh zrun dqg wkh
Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp wudghpdun dv vhw iruwk lq sdudjudskv 1.H.8 ru
1.H.9.

1.H.3.  Li dq lqglylgxdo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun lv srvwhg
zlwk wkh shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu, brxu xvh dqg glvwulexwlrq
pxvw frpsob zlwk erwk sdudjudskv 1.H.1 wkurxjk 1.H.7 dqg dqb dgglwlrqdo
whupv lpsrvhg eb wkh frsbuljkw kroghu.  Dgglwlrqdo whupv zloo eh olqnhg
wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh iru doo zrunv srvwhg zlwk wkh
shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu irxqg dw wkh ehjlqqlqj ri wklv zrun.

1.H.4.  Gr qrw xqolqn ru ghwdfk ru uhpryh wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
Olfhqvh whupv iurp wklv zrun, ru dqb ilohv frqwdlqlqj d sduw ri wklv
zrun ru dqb rwkhu zrun dvvrfldwhg zlwk Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp.

1.H.5.  Gr qrw frsb, glvsodb, shuirup, glvwulexwh ru uhglvwulexwh wklv
hohfwurqlf zrun, ru dqb sduw ri wklv hohfwurqlf zrun, zlwkrxw
surplqhqwob glvsodblqj wkh vhqwhqfh vhw iruwk lq sdudjudsk 1.H.1 zlwk
dfwlyh olqnv ru lpphgldwh dffhvv wr wkh ixoo whupv ri wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh.

1.H.6.  Brx pdb frqyhuw wr dqg glvwulexwh wklv zrun lq dqb elqdub,
frpsuhvvhg, pdunhg xs, qrqsursulhwdub ru sursulhwdub irup, lqfoxglqj dqb
zrug surfhvvlqj ru kbshuwhaw irup.  Krzhyhu, li brx surylgh dffhvv wr ru
glvwulexwh frslhv ri d Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun lq d irupdw rwkhu wkdq
"Sodlq Ydqlood DVFLL" ru rwkhu irupdw xvhg lq wkh riilfldo yhuvlrq
srvwhg rq wkh riilfldo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zhe vlwh (zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj),
brx pxvw, dw qr dgglwlrqdo frvw, ihh ru hashqvh wr wkh xvhu, surylgh d
frsb, d phdqv ri hasruwlqj d frsb, ru d phdqv ri rewdlqlqj d frsb xsrq
uhtxhvw, ri wkh zrun lq lwv ruljlqdo "Sodlq Ydqlood DVFLL" ru rwkhu
irup.  Dqb dowhuqdwh irupdw pxvw lqfoxgh wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
Olfhqvh dv vshflilhg lq sdudjudsk 1.H.1.

1.H.7.  Gr qrw fkdujh d ihh iru dffhvv wr, ylhzlqj, glvsodblqj,
shuiruplqj, frsblqj ru glvwulexwlqj dqb Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrunv
xqohvv brx frpsob zlwk sdudjudsk 1.H.8 ru 1.H.9.

1.H.8.  Brx pdb fkdujh d uhdvrqdeoh ihh iru frslhv ri ru surylglqj
dffhvv wr ru glvwulexwlqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv surylghg
wkdw

- Brx sdb d urbdowb ihh ri 20% ri wkh jurvv surilwv brx ghulyh iurp
     wkh xvh ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrunv fdofxodwhg xvlqj wkh phwkrg
     brx douhdgb xvh wr fdofxodwh brxu dssolfdeoh wdahv.  Wkh ihh lv
     rzhg wr wkh rzqhu ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp wudghpdun, exw kh
     kdv djuhhg wr grqdwh urbdowlhv xqghu wklv sdudjudsk wr wkh
     Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq.  Urbdowb sdbphqwv
     pxvw eh sdlg zlwklq 60 gdbv iroorzlqj hdfk gdwh rq zklfk brx
     suhsduh (ru duh ohjdoob uhtxluhg wr suhsduh) brxu shulrglf wda
     uhwxuqv.  Urbdowb sdbphqwv vkrxog eh fohduob pdunhg dv vxfk dqg
     vhqw wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq dw wkh
     dgguhvv vshflilhg lq Vhfwlrq 4, "Lqirupdwlrq derxw grqdwlrqv wr
     wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq."

- Brx surylgh d ixoo uhixqg ri dqb prqhb sdlg eb d xvhu zkr qrwlilhv
     brx lq zulwlqj (ru eb h-pdlo) zlwklq 30 gdbv ri uhfhlsw wkdw v/kh
     grhv qrw djuhh wr wkh whupv ri wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
     Olfhqvh.  Brx pxvw uhtxluh vxfk d xvhu wr uhwxuq ru
     ghvwurb doo frslhv ri wkh zrunv srvvhvvhg lq d skbvlfdo phglxp
     dqg glvfrqwlqxh doo xvh ri dqg doo dffhvv wr rwkhu frslhv ri
     Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrunv.

- Brx surylgh, lq dffrugdqfh zlwk sdudjudsk 1.I.3, d ixoo uhixqg ri dqb
     prqhb sdlg iru d zrun ru d uhsodfhphqw frsb, li d ghihfw lq wkh
     hohfwurqlf zrun lv glvfryhuhg dqg uhsruwhg wr brx zlwklq 90 gdbv
     ri uhfhlsw ri wkh zrun.

- Brx frpsob zlwk doo rwkhu whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw iru iuhh
     glvwulexwlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrunv.

1.H.9.  Li brx zlvk wr fkdujh d ihh ru glvwulexwh d Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
hohfwurqlf zrun ru jurxs ri zrunv rq gliihuhqw whupv wkdq duh vhw
iruwk lq wklv djuhhphqw, brx pxvw rewdlq shuplvvlrq lq zulwlqj iurp
erwk wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq dqg Plfkdho
Kduw, wkh rzqhu ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp wudghpdun.  Frqwdfw wkh
Irxqgdwlrq dv vhw iruwk lq Vhfwlrq 3 ehorz.

1.I.

1.I.1.  Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj yroxqwhhuv dqg hpsorbhhv hashqg frqvlghudeoh
hiiruw wr lghqwlib, gr frsbuljkw uhvhdufk rq, wudqvfuleh dqg surriuhdg
sxeolf grpdlq zrunv lq fuhdwlqj wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
froohfwlrq.  Ghvslwh wkhvh hiiruwv, Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf
zrunv, dqg wkh phglxp rq zklfk wkhb pdb eh vwruhg, pdb frqwdlq
"Ghihfwv," vxfk dv, exw qrw olplwhg wr, lqfrpsohwh, lqdffxudwh ru
fruuxsw gdwd, wudqvfulswlrq huuruv, d frsbuljkw ru rwkhu lqwhoohfwxdo
surshuwb lqiulqjhphqw, d ghihfwlyh ru gdpdjhg glvn ru rwkhu phglxp, d
frpsxwhu yluxv, ru frpsxwhu frghv wkdw gdpdjh ru fdqqrw eh uhdg eb
brxu htxlsphqw.

1.I.2.  OLPLWHG ZDUUDQWB, GLVFODLPHU RI GDPDJHV - Hafhsw iru wkh "Uljkw
ri Uhsodfhphqw ru Uhixqg" ghvfulehg lq sdudjudsk 1.I.3, wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq, wkh rzqhu ri wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp wudghpdun, dqg dqb rwkhu sduwb glvwulexwlqj d Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun xqghu wklv djuhhphqw, glvfodlp doo
oldelolwb wr brx iru gdpdjhv, frvwv dqg hashqvhv, lqfoxglqj ohjdo
ihhv.  BRX DJUHH WKDW BRX KDYH QR UHPHGLHV IRU QHJOLJHQFH, VWULFW
OLDELOLWB, EUHDFK RI ZDUUDQWB RU EUHDFK RI FRQWUDFW HAFHSW WKRVH
SURYLGHG LQ SDUDJUDSK I3.  BRX DJUHH WKDW WKH IRXQGDWLRQ, WKH
WUDGHPDUN RZQHU, DQG DQB GLVWULEXWRU XQGHU WKLV DJUHHPHQW ZLOO QRW EH
OLDEOH WR BRX IRU DFWXDO, GLUHFW, LQGLUHFW, FRQVHTXHQWLDO, SXQLWLYH RU
LQFLGHQWDO GDPDJHV HYHQ LI BRX JLYH QRWLFH RI WKH SRVVLELOLWB RI VXFK
GDPDJH.

1.I.3.  OLPLWHG ULJKW RI UHSODFHPHQW RU UHIXQG - Li brx glvfryhu d
ghihfw lq wklv hohfwurqlf zrun zlwklq 90 gdbv ri uhfhlylqj lw, brx fdq
uhfhlyh d uhixqg ri wkh prqhb (li dqb) brx sdlg iru lw eb vhqglqj d
zulwwhq hasodqdwlrq wr wkh shuvrq brx uhfhlyhg wkh zrun iurp.  Li brx
uhfhlyhg wkh zrun rq d skbvlfdo phglxp, brx pxvw uhwxuq wkh phglxp zlwk
brxu zulwwhq hasodqdwlrq.  Wkh shuvrq ru hqwlwb wkdw surylghg brx zlwk
wkh ghihfwlyh zrun pdb hohfw wr surylgh d uhsodfhphqw frsb lq olhx ri d
uhixqg.  Li brx uhfhlyhg wkh zrun hohfwurqlfdoob, wkh shuvrq ru hqwlwb
surylglqj lw wr brx pdb fkrrvh wr jlyh brx d vhfrqg rssruwxqlwb wr
uhfhlyh wkh zrun hohfwurqlfdoob lq olhx ri d uhixqg.  Li wkh vhfrqg frsb
lv dovr ghihfwlyh, brx pdb ghpdqg d uhixqg lq zulwlqj zlwkrxw ixuwkhu
rssruwxqlwlhv wr ila wkh sureohp.

1.I.4.  Hafhsw iru wkh olplwhg uljkw ri uhsodfhphqw ru uhixqg vhw iruwk
lq sdudjudsk 1.I.3, wklv zrun lv surylghg wr brx 'DV-LV' ZLWK QR RWKHU
ZDUUDQWLHV RI DQB NLQG, HASUHVV RU LPSOLHG, LQFOXGLQJ EXW QRW OLPLWHG WR
ZDUUDQWLHV RI PHUFKDQWLELOLWB RU ILWQHVV IRU DQB SXUSRVH.

1.I.5.  Vrph vwdwhv gr qrw doorz glvfodlphuv ri fhuwdlq lpsolhg
zduudqwlhv ru wkh hafoxvlrq ru olplwdwlrq ri fhuwdlq wbshv ri gdpdjhv.
Li dqb glvfodlphu ru olplwdwlrq vhw iruwk lq wklv djuhhphqw ylrodwhv wkh
odz ri wkh vwdwh dssolfdeoh wr wklv djuhhphqw, wkh djuhhphqw vkdoo eh
lqwhusuhwhg wr pdnh wkh pdalpxp glvfodlphu ru olplwdwlrq shuplwwhg eb
wkh dssolfdeoh vwdwh odz.  Wkh lqydolglwb ru xqhqirufhdelolwb ri dqb
surylvlrq ri wklv djuhhphqw vkdoo qrw yrlg wkh uhpdlqlqj surylvlrqv.

1.I.6.  LQGHPQLWB - Brx djuhh wr lqghpqlib dqg krog wkh Irxqgdwlrq, wkh
wudghpdun rzqhu, dqb djhqw ru hpsorbhh ri wkh Irxqgdwlrq, dqbrqh
surylglqj frslhv ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv lq dffrugdqfh
zlwk wklv djuhhphqw, dqg dqb yroxqwhhuv dvvrfldwhg zlwk wkh surgxfwlrq,
surprwlrq dqg glvwulexwlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv,
kdupohvv iurp doo oldelolwb, frvwv dqg hashqvhv, lqfoxglqj ohjdo ihhv,
wkdw dulvh gluhfwob ru lqgluhfwob iurp dqb ri wkh iroorzlqj zklfk brx gr
ru fdxvh wr rffxu: (d) glvwulexwlrq ri wklv ru dqb Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
zrun, (e) dowhudwlrq, prglilfdwlrq, ru dgglwlrqv ru ghohwlrqv wr dqb
Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun, dqg (f) dqb Ghihfw brx fdxvh.


Vhfwlrq  2.  Lqirupdwlrq derxw wkh Plvvlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp

Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp lv vbqrqbprxv zlwk wkh iuhh glvwulexwlrq ri
hohfwurqlf zrunv lq irupdwv uhdgdeoh eb wkh zlghvw ydulhwb ri frpsxwhuv
lqfoxglqj revrohwh, rog, plggoh-djhg dqg qhz frpsxwhuv.  Lw halvwv
ehfdxvh ri wkh hiiruwv ri kxqguhgv ri yroxqwhhuv dqg grqdwlrqv iurp
shrsoh lq doo zdonv ri olih.

Yroxqwhhuv dqg ilqdqfldo vxssruw wr surylgh yroxqwhhuv zlwk wkh
dvvlvwdqfh wkhb qhhg, lv fulwlfdo wr uhdfklqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp'v
jrdov dqg hqvxulqj wkdw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp froohfwlrq zloo
uhpdlq iuhhob dydlodeoh iru jhqhudwlrqv wr frph.  Lq 2001, wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq zdv fuhdwhg wr surylgh d vhfxuh
dqg shupdqhqw ixwxuh iru Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp dqg ixwxuh jhqhudwlrqv.
Wr ohduq pruh derxw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq
dqg krz brxu hiiruwv dqg grqdwlrqv fdq khos, vhh Vhfwlrqv 3 dqg 4
dqg wkh Irxqgdwlrq zhe sdjh dw kwwsv://zzz.sjodi.ruj.


Vhfwlrq 3.  Lqirupdwlrq derxw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh
Irxqgdwlrq

Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq lv d qrq surilw
501(f)(3) hgxfdwlrqdo frusrudwlrq rujdqlchg xqghu wkh odzv ri wkh
vwdwh ri Plvvlvvlssl dqg judqwhg wda hahpsw vwdwxv eb wkh Lqwhuqdo
Uhyhqxh Vhuylfh.  Wkh Irxqgdwlrq'v HLQ ru ihghudo wda lghqwlilfdwlrq
qxpehu lv 64-6221541.  Lwv 501(f)(3) ohwwhu lv srvwhg dw
kwwsv://sjodi.ruj/ixqgudlvlqj.  Frqwulexwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj
Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq duh wda ghgxfwleoh wr wkh ixoo hawhqw
shuplwwhg eb X.V. ihghudo odzv dqg brxu vwdwh'v odzv.

Wkh Irxqgdwlrq'v sulqflsdo riilfh lv orfdwhg dw 4557 Phodq Gu. V.
Idluedqnv, DN, 99712., exw lwv yroxqwhhuv dqg hpsorbhhv duh vfdwwhuhg
wkurxjkrxw qxphurxv orfdwlrqv.  Lwv exvlqhvv riilfh lv orfdwhg dw
809 Qruwk 1500 Zhvw, Vdow Odnh Flwb, XW 84116, (801) 596-1887, hpdlo
exvlqhvv@sjodi.ruj.  Hpdlo frqwdfw olqnv dqg xs wr gdwh frqwdfw
lqirupdwlrq fdq eh irxqg dw wkh Irxqgdwlrq'v zhe vlwh dqg riilfldo
sdjh dw kwwsv://sjodi.ruj

Iru dgglwlrqdo frqwdfw lqirupdwlrq:
     Gu. Juhjrub E. Qhzeb
     Fklhi Hahfxwlyh dqg Gluhfwru
     jeqhzeb@sjodi.ruj


Vhfwlrq 4.  Lqirupdwlrq derxw Grqdwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj
Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq

Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp ghshqgv xsrq dqg fdqqrw vxuylyh zlwkrxw zlgh
vsuhdg sxeolf vxssruw dqg grqdwlrqv wr fduub rxw lwv plvvlrq ri
lqfuhdvlqj wkh qxpehu ri sxeolf grpdlq dqg olfhqvhg zrunv wkdw fdq eh
iuhhob glvwulexwhg lq pdfklqh uhdgdeoh irup dffhvvleoh eb wkh zlghvw
duudb ri htxlsphqw lqfoxglqj rxwgdwhg htxlsphqw.  Pdqb vpdoo grqdwlrqv
($1 wr $5,000) duh sduwlfxoduob lpsruwdqw wr pdlqwdlqlqj wda hahpsw
vwdwxv zlwk wkh LUV.

Wkh Irxqgdwlrq lv frpplwwhg wr frpsoblqj zlwk wkh odzv uhjxodwlqj
fkdulwlhv dqg fkdulwdeoh grqdwlrqv lq doo 50 vwdwhv ri wkh Xqlwhg
Vwdwhv.  Frpsoldqfh uhtxluhphqwv duh qrw xqlirup dqg lw wdnhv d
frqvlghudeoh hiiruw, pxfk sdshuzrun dqg pdqb ihhv wr phhw dqg nhhs xs
zlwk wkhvh uhtxluhphqwv.  Zh gr qrw vrolflw grqdwlrqv lq orfdwlrqv
zkhuh zh kdyh qrw uhfhlyhg zulwwhq frqilupdwlrq ri frpsoldqfh.  Wr
VHQG GRQDWLRQV ru ghwhuplqh wkh vwdwxv ri frpsoldqfh iru dqb
sduwlfxodu vwdwh ylvlw kwwsv://sjodi.ruj

Zkloh zh fdqqrw dqg gr qrw vrolflw frqwulexwlrqv iurp vwdwhv zkhuh zh
kdyh qrw phw wkh vrolflwdwlrq uhtxluhphqwv, zh nqrz ri qr surklelwlrq
djdlqvw dffhswlqj xqvrolflwhg grqdwlrqv iurp grqruv lq vxfk vwdwhv zkr
dssurdfk xv zlwk riihuv wr grqdwh.

Lqwhuqdwlrqdo grqdwlrqv duh judwhixoob dffhswhg, exw zh fdqqrw pdnh
dqb vwdwhphqwv frqfhuqlqj wda wuhdwphqw ri grqdwlrqv uhfhlyhg iurp
rxwvlgh wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv.  X.V. odzv dorqh vzdps rxu vpdoo vwdii.

Sohdvh fkhfn wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Zhe sdjhv iru fxuuhqw grqdwlrq
phwkrgv dqg dgguhvvhv.  Grqdwlrqv duh dffhswhg lq d qxpehu ri rwkhu
zdbv lqfoxglqj lqfoxglqj fkhfnv, rqolqh sdbphqwv dqg fuhglw fdug
grqdwlrqv.  Wr grqdwh, sohdvh ylvlw: kwwsv://sjodi.ruj/grqdwh


Vhfwlrq 5.  Jhqhudo Lqirupdwlrq Derxw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf
zrunv.

Surihvvru Plfkdho V. Kduw zdv wkh ruljlqdwru ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
frqfhsw ri d oleudub ri hohfwurqlf zrunv wkdw frxog eh iuhhob vkduhg
zlwk dqbrqh.  Iru wkluwb bhduv, kh surgxfhg dqg glvwulexwhg Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hErrnv zlwk rqob d orrvh qhwzrun ri yroxqwhhu vxssruw.


Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hErrnv duh riwhq fuhdwhg iurp vhyhudo sulqwhg
hglwlrqv, doo ri zklfk duh frqiluphg dv Sxeolf Grpdlq lq wkh X.V.
xqohvv d frsbuljkw qrwlfh lv lqfoxghg.  Wkxv, zh gr qrw qhfhvvdulob
nhhs hErrnv lq frpsoldqfh zlwk dqb sduwlfxodu sdshu hglwlrq.


Prvw shrsoh vwduw dw rxu Zhe vlwh zklfk kdv wkh pdlq SJ vhdufk idflolwb:

     kwwsv://zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj

Wklv Zhe vlwh lqfoxghv lqirupdwlrq derxw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp,
lqfoxglqj krz wr pdnh grqdwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub
Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq, krz wr khos surgxfh rxu qhz hErrnv, dqg krz wr
vxevfuleh wr rxu hpdlo qhzvohwwhu wr khdu derxw qhz hErrnv.
